In Hong Kong, Bruce Lee's father Lee Hoi-chuen awakens from a nightmare about a phantom, known as the Demon, haunting his young son. He subsequently enrolls him in Chinese martial arts training with instructor Yip Man. As a young adult, Bruce fights British sailors who are harassing a young Chinese woman, resulting in him having to leave Hong Kong. His father insists he go to the US.
In the US, Bruce works as a dishwasher at a Chinese restaurant until he gets in a brawl with four of the cooks. The restaurant owner fires him but also lends him money and encourages him to go to college. While studying philosophy in college, Bruce begins to teach martial arts classes, where he meets Linda, a white American. Bruce marries Linda in defiance of her racist mother, Vivian. Linda suggests Bruce establishes a martial arts school, but his Chinese peers demand he train only Chinese people. When Bruce refuses, they challenge him to settle the matter in combat. Bruce defeats a challenger named Johnny Sun in a secret, no-holds-barred match but Johnny attacks Bruce after he has admitted defeat, and Bruce sustains a debilitating back injury. While Bruce is temporarily paralyzed, Linda helps him write the martial arts book Tao of Jeet Kune Do. Linda gives birth to their first child, Brandon, and the couple reconcile with her mother.
Some months later, during a martial arts tournament run by Ed Parker, Johnny challenges Bruce to a rematch. Bruce defeats Johnny, earning the respect of the audience. Unbeknown to Bruce, Johnny is crippled from his injuries in the fight. After the match, Bill Krieger, who later becomes Bruce's manager, offers him the role of Kato in the television series The Green Hornet. Bruce and Krieger also create the idea for the television series Kung Fu, agreeing that Bruce will feature in the lead role. At a cast party, Linda says she is pregnant with their second child, Shannon. Shortly afterwards, the cancellation of The Green Hornet is announced. Kung Fu later makes it to television but much to Bruce's frustration, it stars the white actor David Carradine. Bruce believes Krieger has betrayed him.
Bruce returns to Hong Kong for his father's funeral. Philip Tan, a Hong Kong film producer, hires Bruce to star in the film The Big Boss. During the filming of the final scene, Johnny's brother Luke attacks Bruce in revenge for Johnny's humiliating defeat and subsequent disability; Bruce wins the fight. The Big Boss is a success and Bruce makes several more films, working as an actor, director and editor. This causes a rift between Bruce and Linda, as Linda wishes to return to the US. Krieger offers Bruce a chance to work on a big-budget Hollywood film, to which Bruce agrees, partly due to Linda's wish to return home.
On the 32nd day of filming Enter the Dragon, during the "room of mirrors" sequence, Bruce has a terrifying vision of the Demon that has haunted his and his father's dreams. This time, after being beaten and then shown his own grave, Bruce sees his son urging Bruce to save him. The Demon pursues Brandon, spurring Bruce to fight back, save Brandon and break the Demon's neck. Dragon: The Bruce Lee Story ends with Bruce filming another scene from Enter the Dragon, the film that would make him an international star. In a voice-over, Linda tells the audience Bruce fell into a mysterious coma and died shortly before the film's release, and says while many people want to talk about how he died, she prefers to remember how he lived. 
The jingling criticism of Dromio of Syracuse will ever recur to the
essayist on an unconventional subject. Lest any therefore should claim
of this essay that “in the why and the wherefore is neither rhyme nor
reason,” excuse shall come prologue to the theme, and its “wherefore”
shall receive a moment’s merited attention. Of what utility, it may
be asked, can the study of certain insane persons appearing in early
modern drama be to the student of to-day? To this question let us
give a double answer. The study has a distinct historical value, for
from the mass of original documents which form the body of drama
under consideration, we may gather much of the progress which has
been made in the attitude of the country towards insanity, and hence
the increasing tendency towards a humane and intelligent outlook
upon disease in general. Our study is also of value from the point
of view of literature—partly as shewing the varying accuracy of our
dramatists and the art with which they portrayed their mad folk and
introduced them into their plays, partly by selecting and exposing the
chief types of the mad folk themselves, considering them on their own
merits, as pieces of art of intrinsic literary value. This last will be
the chief business of the present essay.

We shall follow the order above indicated, regarding the presentation
of madness successively from the standpoints of history and of
literature. Under the latter head we shall consider several general
questions before proceeding to isolate individual characters in turn.
Lastly, we shall endeavour, from the matter furnished us by these
plays, to extract some general conclusions.

One proviso must be made before we can embark upon our subject. What,
for the purposes of this essay, is to be the criterion of madness? In
ordinary life, as we know, the border-land of the rational and the
irrational is but ill-defined. We cannot always tell whether mental
disease is actually present in a person whom we have known all our
lives, much less can we say when the pronounced eccentricity of a
stranger has passed the bourn which divides it from insanity. The
medical profession itself has not always been too wise where madness is
concerned; and where the profession is at fault, with every detail of
the case before it, how can the layman aspire to success, with only
a few pages of evidence before him of a “case” propounded by another
layman of three centuries before? Were we to take the point of view
of the physician we should be plunged into a medical dissertation for
which we are both ill-equipped and ill-inclined.

But there is another, and a far more serious objection, already hinted
at, to the adoption in this essay of the medical point of view. The
authors themselves were not physicians; in many cases, as will be
seen, they appear to have had but an imperfect technical knowledge
of insanity and its treatment; their ideas were based largely on the
loose and popular medical ideas of the Elizabethan age. If we are to
consider this subject as a department of literature we must adopt the
point of view of the dramatist, not of the practical physician. We
must, for the time, definitely break with those who enquire deeply and
seriously into the state of mind of every character in Shakespeare. In
dealing with “King Lear,” for example, we shall make no attempt to pry
behind the curtain five minutes before the opening of the play for the
purpose of detecting thus early some symptoms of approaching senile
decay. Nor shall we follow those who endeavour to carry the history of
Shylock beyond the limits of Shakespeare’s knowledge of him, in the
hope of discovering whether he was true or false to the religion of
his fathers. The critic who peeps behind the scenes at such times as
these finds only the scene-shifters and the green room, where his nice
offence will soon receive appropriate comments!

Our best plan, then, will be habitually to consider the plays from
the point of view which we take to be that of the author himself.
Prejudices will be put aside, and predispositions to premature
diagnoses resisted. Constance and Timon of Athens, with several
personages from Marlowe’s dramas, will be regarded (with some effort)
as sane, for the simple and quite adequate reason that they were so
regarded by their authors. The question whether or no Hamlet was
actually insane will, for the same reason, be dismissed in a few
words; while the many witches who haunt Elizabethan drama, and whose
prototypes afforded in nearly every case genuine examples of dementia,
will be heroically disregarded, as falling without the bounds of our
proposed theme.

From the number of occurrences in this body of drama of such words
as “mad,” “madness,” “Bedlam,” “frantic,” and the like, it might be
supposed that there are more genuine mad folk than actually appear. A
few words will suffice to clear up this difficulty.

The term “madness” is often used in a loose, unmeaning sense,—in
phrases such as “Mad wench!”, somewhat resembling the equally
unmeaning slang of to-day. To insist on this point would probably
provoke the charge of a lack of the sense of humour, and insistence is
indeed unnecessary. Most readers of Shakespeare will recall Leontes’
transport before the supposed statue of his wife, a transport which
he characterises as “madness”; Portia’s description of that “hare,”
“madness the youth”; Biron’s apostrophe:

              “Behaviour, what wert thou
    Till this madman show’d thee?”[5:1]

and no less Shylock’s famous description of men that

    “are mad if they behold a cat.”[5:2]

Those who are acquainted with “Philaster” may remember Megra’s
description of

    “A woman’s madness,
     The glory of a fury,”[5:3]

and everyone has at some time or other lighted upon that kind of “fine
madness” which is the property of every true poet, and which Drayton,
attributing it to Marlowe, declares

    “rightly should possess a poet’s brain.”[5:4]

Nowhere in these passages are we expected to see insanity, though
the last two are somewhat stronger than the others, and are typical
of many places where “madness” is used for simple passion and for
inspiration respectively.

In a very special sense, however, madness is used for the passion of
love, to such an extent that there is an actual gradation into madness
itself. Loosely, and often humorously, the lover is said to be mad for
the same reason as the lunatic. To quote Shakespeare once more—as he
is more familiar than many of his contemporaries—

    “The lunatic, the lover and the poet,
     Are of imagination all compact.”[6:1]

There is only a step between seeing “Helen’s beauty in a brow of
Egypt,”[6:2] and seeing “more devils than vast hell can hold.”[6:3]
Once cool reason has given way to “frenzy,” the Elizabethan is not
always too subtle in his distinctions within that convenient term.
So when Troilus informs us that he is “mad in Cressida’s love,”[6:4]
when Rosalind jestingly speaks of love as deserving “a dark house and
a whip,”[6:5] and when Mercutio declares that his Rosaline-tormented
Romeo will “sure run mad,”[6:6] we must not altogether discard such
references as idle or even conventional. For while there is a great
gulf fixed between such “frenzies” as these and the madness of the
love-lorn Ophelia or even of the Gaoler’s Daughter in the “Two Noble
Kinsmen,” we can only account for such a peculiar case as Memnon—in
Fletcher’s “Mad Lover”—by postulating a conscious development of the
idea that “love is a kind of madness.”

It is possible that the difficulty of keeping to the point of view we
have chosen may lead to many mistakes being made in our treatment of
individual characters. But it seems better to run the risk of this
than to set about this work as though it were a medical treatise, or
as though the plays to be considered had been produced by a kind of
evolution, and not by very human, imperfect, work-a-day playwrights.
That being said, Prologue has finished:

    “Now, good or bad, ’tis but the chance of war.”


FOOTNOTES:

[5:1] “Love’s Labour’s Lost,” v., 2, 337.

[5:2] “Merchant of Venice,” iv., 1, 48.

[5:3] “Philaster,” ii., 4.

[5:4] Drayton, “The Battle of Agincourt.”

[6:1] “Midsummer Night’s Dream,” v., 1, 7.

[6:2] l. 11.

[6:3] l. 9.

[6:4] “Troilus and Cressida,” i., 1, 51.

[6:5] “As You Like It,” iii., 2, 420.

[6:6] “Romeo and Juliet,” ii., 4, 5.




CHAPTER II.

THE PRESENTATION OF MADNESS—FROM THE STANDPOINT OF HISTORY.

    “A mad world, my masters!”

                                                      (_Middleton._)


The earliest view of madness which finds its way into this drama and
persists throughout it, is based on the idea of possession by evil
spirits. This conception came down from remote ages; it accounts, for
example, for the madness of King Saul in the Old Testament, when “The
Spirit of the Lord departed from Saul and an evil spirit troubled
him.”[8:1] In the Elizabethan Age, demoniacal possession was still
regarded as one of the most potent causes of insanity; it was made
to account not only for mental disease but for all kinds of physical
deformations and imperfections, whether occurring alone, or, as is
often the case, accompanying idiocy. An offshoot, as it were, from this
idea, is the ascription of mental disease to the influence of witches,
who were often themselves (ironically enough), persons suffering from
mental disorders. So enlightened a man as Sir Thomas Browne declares
more than once his belief in witches and their influence; Burton’s
“Anatomy of Melancholy” asserts that melancholy can be caused and
cured by witches; the learned James, King of England, and Edward Coke,
who lived at the same time, both take up the legal aspects, stating
that the plea of insanity offered on behalf of witches should not be
recognised at the legal tribunal. In Middleton’s “Witch” (i., 2),
there is a mention of “solanum somniferum” (otherwise known as Deadly
Nightshade or Atropa Belladonna) which was the chief ingredient in many
witches’ recipes and produced hallucinations and other abnormal states
of mind. Banquo, in Shakespeare’s “Macbeth,” probably refers to the
witches’ influence when he enquires, directly after the first meeting
with them:

          “Have we eaten on the insane root
    That takes the reason prisoner?”[9:1]

A counterpart to the idea of possession by demons is found in a belief,
common at this time and earlier, in the inspired utterances of the
frenzied prophetess. Neither here nor with the witches was any curative
treatment undertaken. For with the oracle no such treatment was thought
to be necessary or even advisable, and with the witches none except
death was supposed to avail. Occasionally a “witch” might be subjected,
like other mad folk, to “chains” and “whips,” but the road more often
taken was the short one. In simple cases of demoniacal possession the
means of cure was patent: the demon must be cast out and the patient
will return to his right mind. The exorcisation of the “conjuror” was
commonly accompanied by pseudo-medical treatment, the nature of which
will presently appear.

Now the influence of the demonological conception of insanity is
clearly seen in our dramas. Everyone is familiar, to go no farther
than Shakespeare, with the famous exorcisation scene in “Twelfth
Night,”[10:1] where the clown, disguised as “Sir Topas the curate,”
comes to visit “Malvolio the lunatic,” and drives out the “hyperbolical
fiend” which is supposed to vex him. Everything Malvolio does can be
expressed in terms of Satan. When the wretched man speaks, it is the
“fiend” speaking “hollow” within him. His disgusted exclamation when
Maria urges him to “say his prayers” is construed into the fiend’s
repugnance to things sacred. Fabian advises “no way (of treatment)
but gentleness . . . the fiend is rough and will not be roughly used.”
While Sir Toby protests that it is “not for gravity to play at
cherry-pit with Satan; hang him, foul collier.” A more complete and
far more famous illustration may be found in “Lear,”[10:2] where Edgar
attributes his assumed madness to possession by the various spirits
which he names. Almost his first words in his disguise tell of the
“foul fiend” leading him “through fire and through flame, through
ford and whirlpool, o’er bog and quagmire.”[11:1] He names “the foul
Flibbertigibbet,” the fiend of “mopping and mowing,”[11:2] who “gives
the web and the pin, squints the eye, and makes the harelip;”[11:3]
of “the prince of darkness . . . a gentleman; Modo he’s called and
Mahu”;[11:4] of “Hobbididence prince of dumbness;” of “Hoppedance”
who “cries in Tom’s belly for two white herring”[11:5] and many
others—culled from the flowery page of Harsnet’s “Popish Impostures.”

A more modern idea of insanity is that which attributes it to natural
physical causes, and this finds expression in our dramas—often in
the same play—side by side with the conception just mentioned. The
capriciousness of heredity, for instance, is recognised by the author
of “A Fair Quarrel”:

    “Wise men beget fools and fools are the fathers
     To many wise children . . .
     A great scholar may beget an idiot,
     And from the ploughtail may come a great scholar.”[11:6]

The supposed justice of the same law is illustrated by a passage in
Brome’s “English Moor,” where among punishments for sin is included:

    “That his base offspring proves a natural idiot.”

One of the most popular of the physical causes assigned by seventeenth
century dramatists to madness is the worm in the brain. “Madam,” says
Arcadius in Shirley’s “Coronation,” “my uncle is something craz’d;
there is a worm in’s brain.”[12:1] Shirley frequently refers to this
particular “cause,” and Winfield, one of the characters in “The Ball,”
adds to it another superstition when he says: “He has a worm in’s
brain, which some have suppos’d at some time o’ the moon doth ravish
him into perfect madness.”[12:2]

Superstition is responsible for many of the “causes” of madness in our
drama, and among these the most prominent is probably the superstition
responsible for the English word “lunatic.” The supposed influence
of the moon on insanity and of its deviations on the recurrence of
maniacal periods is clearly the source of those words which Shakespeare
gives to Othello after the murder of Desdemona:

    “It is the very error of the moon;
     She comes more nearer earth than she was wont
     And makes men mad.”[12:3]

So Lollio, in “The Changeling,” tells Franciscus that “Luna” made him
mad.[12:4] The “parson” who figures, too, among the mad folk in “The
Pilgrim,” has to be “tied short” since “the moon’s i’ th’ full.”[12:5]

That the superstition connected with the moon, however, was under high
medical patronage is shewn by a reference to the “Anatomie of the Bodie
of Man” by one Vicary, chief surgeon at St. Bartholomew’s Hospital
(1548-1562). “Also the Brayne” (he writes) “hath this propertie that
it moveth and followeth the moving of the moone; for in the waxing of
the moone the brayne discendeth downwarde and vanisheth in substance of
vertue; for then the Brayne shrinketh together in itselfe and is not so
fully obedient to the spirit of feeling, and this is proved in men that
be lunaticke or madde . . . that be moste greeved in the beginning of
the newe moone and in the latter quarter of the moone. Wherefore when it
happeneth that the Brayne is either too drye or too moyst, then can it
not werke his kinde; then are the spirits of life melted and resolved
away, and then foloweth feebleness of the wittes and of al other
members of the bodie, and at the laste death.”

The word “lunatic” itself, it may be noted, quickly passed into common
speech, and was used without reference to its original significance. We
shall find it constantly recurring throughout this study, but as there
is little variety in its use, no further examples need be quoted.

An interesting superstition is connected with the mandrake plant,
round which, from the supposed resemblance of its strangely cleft root
to the human figure, many weird notions have gathered. One of these was
that when torn from the ground, the plant would utter groans of “sad
horror,” which, if heard, caused instant madness, or even death.[14:1]
From the numerous references to this superstition in Elizabethan drama
may be extracted two,—the first from “Romeo and Juliet” (iv., 3,
47-8), where Juliet speaks of

            “shrieks of mandrakes, torn out of the earth
    That living mortals, hearing them, run mad”;

the second from a speech of Suffolk’s in “2 Henry VI.” (iii., 2, 310),
where the Duke reminds the Queen that curses will not kill

    “as doth the mandrake’s groan.”

Other causes to which, rightly or wrongly, insanity is attributed may
be grouped together for convenience. In the “Emperor of the East” is an
obvious reminiscence of Holy Writ where Flaccilla says of Pulcheria:

            “Grant heaven, your too much learning
    Does not conclude in madness.”[14:2]

This devout wish, however, has only about as much claim to be taken
seriously as Leonato’s fear that Benedick and Beatrice, married a week,
would “talk themselves mad.”[15:1]

Such causes as irritation, worry, jealousy and persecution are
frequently mentioned as conducing to frenzy, if not actually causing
it. The Abbess of the “Comedy of Errors,” reproaching Adriana for her
treatment of Antipholus, sums the matter up thus:

    “The venom clamours of a jealous woman
     Poisons more deadly than a mad dog’s tooth.
     It seems his sleeps were hinder’d by thy railing,
     And thereof comes it that his head is light.
     Thou say’st his meat was sauced with thy upbraidings:
     Unquiet meals make ill digestions;
     Thereof the raging fire of fever bred;
     And what’s a fever but a fit of madness?
     Thou say’st his sports were hinder’d by thy brawls:
     Sweet recreation barr’d, what doth ensue
     But moody and dull melancholy . . .
     Have scared thy husband from the use of wits.”[15:2]

We need not stay long over the numerous characters who speak of anger
as leading to madness. The term “horn-mad,” however, is sufficiently
interesting to be cleared up here.[15:3]

It is used in two senses. Often it is no more than an emphatic way of
expressing the simple adjective. In this sense it may be connected
with the Scottish word “harns,” meaning “brains,” an alternative form
being “horn-wood.” When Joculo, in Day’s “Law Tricks,” suggests that
“the better half of the townsmen will run horn-mad,”[16:1] this is
clearly the sense in which the words are to be taken. But in another
sense, the source of which is evident, “horn-mad” is the word used to
denote a kind of madness unknown as a technical term to the medical
profession, but very common in the less elevated portions of our drama.
This madness is a thing

                        “Created
    Of woman’s making and her faithless vows”;

the madness, in a word, of the cuckold. Falstaff seems to be punning
on the two senses of the term when he says: “If I have horns to make
me mad, let the proverb go with me: I’ll be horn mad.”[16:2] Dekker
exhibits an especial fondness for this particular pun. Cordolente, the
shopkeeper of “Match Me in London,” whose wife the King has seduced,
says on being informed by that monarch that he is mad: “I am indeed
horn-mad. O me! In the holiest place of the Kingdom have I caught my
undoing.”[16:3] Similar passages can be found in nearly all Dekker’s
plays, whether true madness is actually in question or not.

A world of meaning lies beneath such phrases as “dog-madness,”
“midsummer madness,” “March mad,” “as mad as May butter.”[17:1] The
first refers primarily to hydrophobia, though it is not always used in
that sense; the second is accounted for by the old belief that insanity
was fiercest and most prevalent in midsummer. The phrase “March mad” is
connected with the saying “As mad as a March hare.” Its explanation is
that during the month of March, their breeding season, hares are wilder
than usual. An example of the use of the phrase might be quoted from
Drayton’s (non-dramatic) work, “Nymphidia”:

    “Oberon . . . Grew mad as any hare
     When he had sought each place with care
     And found his queen was missing.”

“May butter” is unsalted butter, preserved during May for medicinal use
in healing wounds. The connexion of the phrase with madness, however,
is so deep as to be no longer understood!

Finally, among the causes of madness recognised in the seventeenth
century must be mentioned melancholy, though we shall have to return
to this on another page. The common belief appears to have been,
in the words of the Doctors of the Induction to the “Taming of the
Shrew,” that “Melancholy is the nurse of frenzy,”[17:2] and incipient
melancholiacs are constantly adjured by their nearest and dearest to
remember this fact—though their adjurations seldom have any effect.
The Duchess of Malfi, indeed, hearing in her captivity a “hideous
noise,” and being told:

                  “’Tis the wild consort
    Of madmen, lady, whom your tyrant brother
    Hath placed about your lodging,”

replies:

    “Indeed, I thank him; nothing but noise and folly
     Can keep me in my right wits; whereas reason
     And silence make me mad.”[18:1]

In the “Lover’s Melancholy,” Prince Palador is presented with a “Masque
of Melancholy” (for which the author was largely indebted to Burton) in
order that his diseased mind may be relieved. These two cases certainly
shew a divergence from the more general opinion. The first may perhaps
be attributed to the Duchess’ desire: “to make a virtue of necessity,”
the second to the fact that Palador’s disease is not true melancholia,
but a state of mind bordering on affectation—that melancholy affected
by more than one of Shakespeare’s “humorous” characters, of whom it can
be said “You may call it melancholy if you will favour the man, but by
my head ’tis pride.”[18:2]

We may gather next, from our plays, some of the recognised symptoms of
insanity in these early times. Epicene, pretending to recognise the
madness of Morose, says: “Lord, how idly he talks, and how his eyes
sparkle! he looks green about the temples! do you see what blue spots
he has?” Clerimont has his answer ready: “Ay, ’tis melancholy.”[19:1]
But these two are over-frivolous; their diagnosis is untrustworthy; we
must turn to surer ground. One supposed sign of madness was evidently
the quickening of the heart and the pulse. Hamlet, in a well-known
passage, ridicules his mother’s idea that the ghost which he sees is
due to “ecstasy”:

                              “Ecstasy!
    My pulse, as yours, doth temperately keep time,
    And makes as healthful music.”[19:2]

Philaster, declaring his sanity to Arethusa, says:

                          “Take this sword
    And search how temperate a heart I have . . . .”

and again:

                    “. . . Am I raging now?
    If I were mad, I should desire to live.
    Sir, feel my pulse, whether have you known
    A man in a more equal tune to die.”

Bellario replies:

    “Alas, my lord, your pulse keeps madman’s time!
     So does your tongue.”[19:3]

That these tests were inadequate is proved by a simple illustration—in
the “Comedy of Errors,” Pinch the exorcist, mistakes Antipholus’ anger
for madness. Luciana cries:

    “Alas, how fiery and how sharp he looks!”

And a courtezan,

    “Mark, how he trembles in his ecstasy!”[20:1]

Pinch attempts to feel the “madman’s” pulse, but in any case he knows
that both man and master are possessed:

    “I know it by their pale and deadly looks.”[20:2]

The madman was supposed not to be aware of the nature of his disease.
“That proves you mad,” says the Officer in Dekker’s “Honest Whore,”
by a strange piece of reasoning, “because you know it not.”[20:3]
Throughout the plays occurs the same phenomenon. Even when certain
of the mad folk recognise that they are afflicted with some sort of
disease, they resent questioning on it. Guildenstern’s account of
Hamlet is significant of a large number of cases:

    “Nor do we find him forward to be sounded,
     But with a crafty madness, keeps aloof
     When we would bring him on to some confession
     Of his true state.”[20:4]

The resentment is no doubt due to a subconscious wish of the madman
to hide his loss of that sense of personal identity which is used by
Shakespeare as one of the criteria of madness. Constance’ proof to
Pandulph of her entire sanity will be remembered:

    “I am not mad; this hair I tear is mine.
     My name is Constance; I was Geffrey’s wife;
     Young Arthur is my son and he is lost:
     I am not mad[21:1]. . .”

Sebastian, in “Twelfth Night,” gives similar evidence:

    “This is the air; that is the glorious sun;
     This pearl she gave me. I do feel’t and see’t;
     And though ’tis wonder that enwraps me thus,
     Yet ’tis not madness.”[21:2]

Another symptom of insanity was sleeping with open eyes. Meleander,
in the “Lover’s Melancholy,” “sleeps . . . with eyes open, and that’s
no good sign”[21:3] and the Duchess of Malfi is said to sleep “like a
madman, with (her) eyes open.”[21:4]

A general wildness of demeanour was thought to be characteristic of
both the earlier and the later stages of madness. Songs and dances
are often associated with it; wild laughter, “the usher to a violent
extremity,” accompanied by fulminations against the world in general;
bitter sarcasm, sudden touches of pathos and consequent outbursts of
anger; “thundering” and “roaring,” which can only be checked by like
excesses on the part of others—these are all common symptoms, together
with “raving” on all kinds of subjects. This wildness, however, is not
inconsistent with considerable force and pregnancy of speech, which
might lead some to doubt the actual presence of insanity; and which is
“a happiness that often madness hits on, which reason and sanity could
not so prosperously be delivered of.”[22:1] A sense of physical pain,
of being “cut to the brains,” might also afflict the patient; and the
disease frequently causes such suffering that

    “Nor the exterior nor the inward man
     Resembles that it was.”[22:2]

An excellent objective description of a single case is furnished by the
“Gentleman” in “Hamlet” who announces the frenzy of Ophelia:

    “She speaks much of her father; says she hears
     There’s tricks i’ the world, and hems and beats her heart;
     Spurns enviously at straws; speaks things in doubt,
     That carry but half sense; her speech is nothing,
     Yet the unshaped use of it doth move
     The hearers to collection; they aim at it,
     And botch the words up fit to their own thoughts;
     Which as her winks and nods and gestures yield them
     Indeed would make one think there might be thought,
     Though nothing sure, yet much unhappily.”[22:3]

As to the nature of the madman’s talk, we find it impossible to
generalise, and the ideas of different authors on what it should be
have not much agreement, beyond the one condition that there should be
wanting what Shakespeare aptly calls “a dependency of thing on thing.”
This will be noted more particularly when we come to the study of
individual characters.

From these symptoms and others which might be cited it will be evident
that the madness of our dramas is far from being confined to one
type. We know that various kinds of insanity were recognised in the
seventeenth century. Corax, the physician of the “Lover’s Melancholy,”
makes it clear that

                              “Ecstasy
    Fantastic Dotage, Madness, Frenzy, Rapture
    Of mere imagination differ partly
    From Melancholy.”[23:1]

Our learned informant, Ben Jonson, diagnoses another case of insanity
as “the disease in Greek . . . called μα νια, in Latin, insania, furor,
vel ecstasis melancholica, that is egressio, when a man ex melancholico
evadit fanaticus, . . . . But he may be but ‘phreneticus,’ yet,
mistress, and ‘phrenesis’ is only ‘delirium’ or so.”[23:2] And indeed
there are all varieties of insanity in the plays before us. There is
the young person who merely talks “fantastically,” “like a justice of
peace,” “of a thousand matters and all to no purpose,”[23:3] and whose
words “though they (lack) form a little,” are “not like madness.”[23:4]
There is the person dominated by the “idée fixe”—examples differing
widely occur in “King Lear” and in “Bartholomew Fair.” There is the
“idiot” and there is the “imbecile”—two types between which it would
be affectation here to attempt a discrimination. The melancholiac,
one of “sundry kinds,” affected by a “mere commotion of the mind,
o’ercharged with fear and sorrow,”[24:1] is one of the commonest types.
Mania and delusional insanity are also frequent and account for a
large proportion of our characters. Yet, since this is not a medical
treatise, how can we distinguish any more finely? We shall do better
not to attempt a more detailed classification of our mad folk than
this, which will be utilised later in the consideration of individual
characters. “It is not as deep as a well, nor as wide as a church-door,
but ’twill serve.” Like more than one of those Elizabethan playwrights
we may feel that:

                    “To define true madness
    What is’t but to be nothing else but mad?”[24:2]

On this let us act and employ a literary rather than a medical
criticism.

Our dramas are not silent as to the way in which lunatics were regarded
by the world at large. Few people at that time had the sympathy of
Langland for those whom, three hundred years before, he beautifully
called “God’s minstrels”—a title explained by the preceding
exhortation to his readers to bestow their gifts on the wandering
insane as bountifully as though they were wandering minstrels. For
the most part the lunatic seems to have been regarded, when confined,
as a negligible factor in everyday life,[25:1] and when at large as a
harmless and a gratuitous amusement. So, as has just been noted, the
Duchess of Malfi is regaled before her death with “some sport” in the
shape of several madmen who sing and dance before her. Here, of course,
the intention is a sinister one, but there is no sinister meaning in a
casual remark let fall by Truewit in the “Silent Woman”—“Mad folks and
other strange sights to be seen daily, private, and public”![25:2] Nor
is there any idea but one of legitimate amusement in the entertainment
organised by the master of a private asylum, Alibius by name, for the
marriage of Beatrice-Joanna (in “The Changeling”) and given, as he
says, by:

    “A mixture of our madmen and our fools,
     To finish, as it were, and make the fag
     Of all the revels, the third night from the first.”[25:3]

Isabella caustically remarks “Madmen and fools are a staple commodity.”

In this connexion, a particular class of lunatic deserves notice.
The Bedlam beggar, variously known as “bedlamer,” “bedlamite,” and
“Abraham’s man,” was originally an inmate of Bedlam, but, coming to be
regarded as convalescent, had been set free and would roam about the
country, half-crazed, living for the most part on the charity of such
as would befriend him. In Dekker’s “Belman of London,” a non-dramatic
work professing to expose “The most notorious Villanies that are now
Practised in the Kingdome,” is a long description, in the manner of
a seventeenth century “character,” of one of “those Wild-geese or
Hayre-braynes . . . called Abraham’s men.” Dekker at least has little
good to say of them. “The fellow . . . sweares he hath bin in bedlam
and will talke frantickly of purpose: you see pinnes stuck in sundry
places of his naked flesh, especially in his armes, which paine he
gladly puts himselfe to (beeing indeede no torment at all, his skin is
either so dead, with some fowle disease, or so hardned with weather),
onely to make you believe he is out of his wits: he calls himself by
the name of Poore Tom, and comming neere anybody, cryes out Poore Tom
is a-cold . . . .” The mind at once turns to Edgar and the celebrated
lines where he poses as one of those very “Abraham-men”:

    “This country gives me proof and precedent
     Of Bedlam beggars, who, with roaring voices,
     Strike in their numb’d and mortified bare arms
     Pins, wooden pricks, nails, sprigs of rosemary;
     And with this horrible object, from low farms,
     Poor pelting villages, sheep cotes, and mills,
     Sometime with lunatic bans, sometime with prayers
     Enforce their charity.”[26:1]

From all that we can gather, however, of the treatment of the insane
in madhouses of the time, it would seem probable that, among those
released or escaping from them, many would still be genuine lunatics.
At the same time, it was no doubt fairly easy to make a living in the
way Dekker describes, and numbers of beggars must have emulated Edgar’s
behaviour from far less worthy motives.

Such a lack of popular sympathy could hardly go hand-in-hand with a
peculiarly humanitarian treatment of the insane. The Saxon treatment
of lunatics has been described as “a curious compound of pharmacy,
superstition, and castigation.” In the seventeenth century it had
been but little improved upon. Its most characteristic feature was
confinement in a dark room, with additional treatment, varying
according to circumstances. A book, of date 1542, called “A Compendious
Pygment or a Dyetry of Helth” by one Dr. Borde, advises the keeping
of lunatics in a dark room, provided with no knives, girdles, nor
pictures of man or woman on the wall. Few words are to be used except
in gentle reproofs and the dietary is to be careful and ample. Dr.
Borde’s treatment was enlarged upon in later days; chains were used
to prevent escape; castigation was employed freely and often attended
with great cruelty. A quatrain in Burton’s “Anatomy of Melancholy”
(1621), confirms this statement, presenting what is indeed a ghastly
picture. It is all borne out by the dramatic references, which are
extremely numerous. The lunatic _chez lui_ is evidently a subject
which appeals to the dramatist: madness and its cure become topics
of ordinary conversation. Rosalind, in playful banter with Orlando,
compares love to “a madness,” which “deserves as well a dark house
and a whip as madmen do; and the reason why they are not so punished
and cured is, that the lunacy is so ordinary that the whippers are in
love too.”[28:1] Leonato, in “Much Ado” talks (from our point of view
ominously) of those who would

    “Give preceptial medicine to rage,
     Fetter strong madness in a silken thread,
     Charm ache with air and agony with words.”[28:2]

Shakespeare is not predicting here, as has been suggested, the
application of gentle methods to insanity, but ridiculing those
who were so foolish as to apply “a moral medicine to a mortifying
mischief.” Even as he wrote lightly of the silken thread, he would have
heard in imagination the clank of the lunatic’s chains.

Another addition to the attractions of the asylum was the course of
slow starvation, and this is hinted at in a casual allusion by Romeo in
“Romeo and Juliet”:

    “Why Romeo, art thou mad?” +asks Benvolio.+

    “Not mad,” +answers Romeo,+ “but bound more than a madman is,
     Shut up in prison, kept without my food,
     Whipped and tormented.”[29:1]

Pinch the conjuror knows what to do in cases of madness:

    “Mistress, both man and master is possess’d . . .
     They must be bound and laid in some dark room.”

George, in “The Honest Whore,” has heard of domestic cures: “’Sfoot!
I have known many women that have had mad rascals to their husbands,
whom they would belabour by all means possible to keep ’em in their
right wits.” And a character in Marston’s “What You Will” speaks in a
delightfully brisk and business-like manner: “Shut the windows, darken
the room, fetch whips; the fellow is mad, he raves, he raves—talks
idly—lunatic.”

Few tests were needed to convince the keepers of an asylum that
their patient was mad, and if it could be made a matter of pecuniary
advantage to them to incarcerate any person, they would often take him
and clothe him in the “fool’s coat” or clap him into the “madman’s
cage” without making too many inquiries. Thus the madhouse became,
in many a sinister sense, “a house of correction to whip us into our
senses.”[29:2]

Before we leave the historical side of our subject, some mention must
be made of the famous Bedlam, so often mentioned in connexion with
the mad folk of our plays. The real and original Bedlam, “Bethlem
monastery,” as it is called, “the madman’s pound,” which is actually
introduced into one or more of the plays under consideration,[30:1]
was formerly the Hospital of St. Mary Bethlehem in Bishopsgate Street.
The Priory was founded for this Order in 1247 by an ex-sheriff named
Simon Fitz-Mary. It passed through many vicissitudes, chief among which
were a seizure by the Crown in 1375 and the dissolution by Henry VIII.
in 1547. After this latter date the revenues were held by the Mayor,
the commonalty and the citizens of London. For some hundred and fifty
years the Hospital had been used for lunatics, and the only difference
in this use caused by its dissolution as a religious house seems to
have been that it became incorporated as a Royal Foundation. For a
considerable time it suffered through poverty, being largely dependent
on legacies, such as Sir Thomas Gresham’s in 1575, and on general alms.
Mistress Trainewell, in Brome’s “Northern Lass” (1632), mentions Bedlam
among other objects of charity, and suggests to Squelch an excellent
reason for patronising it. The passage may be quoted in full:

    _Squelch_: “I will now bestow my wealth in monumental good
    deeds, and charitable uses in my life-time, to be talked well
    on when I am dead.”

    _Trainewell_: “Yes, build almshouses and hospitals for beggars,
    and provide in Bridewell houses of correction for your friends
    and kindred. Pray give enough to Bedlam, you may feel some part
    of that benefit yourself before you die, if these fits hold
    you.”

The later history of Bedlam is uneventful, and, to us, unimportant.
In 1676 it was transferred to London Wall, the new buildings being
known as the “New Hospital of Bethlehem,” and in 1815 to Lambeth.
Bethlem Hospital was by far the best known of London mad-houses in the
Seventeenth Century; two more are mentioned by Stow in his “Survey of
London,” and may be noted here. The first was “an Hospitall in the
Parish of Barking Church,” founded “by Robert Denton Chaplen, for the
sustentation of poore Priests, and other both men and women, that were
sicke of the Phrenzie, there to remaine till they were perfectly whole,
and restored to good memorie.”[31:1] In another place, under the title
of “An house belonging to Bethlem,” we read: “Then had ye an house
wherein sometime were distraught and lunatike people, of what antiquity
founded, or by whom I have not read, neither of the suppression, but
it was said that sometime a King of England, not liking such a kind
of people to remaine so neare his pallace, caused them to be remoued
farther of, to Bethlem without Bishops gate of London, and to that
Hospitall the said house by Charing crosse doth yet remaine.”[32:1]

No doubt there were also private asylums in existence, where the
treatment of the patients was harsh, and their comforts were few. The
conditions, indeed, seem to have been very similar to those of Bedlam.
These and other details may be gathered chiefly from four plays, in
each of which there are “madhouse scenes”—they are “The Pilgrim” by
John Fletcher, “The Honest Whore” by Thomas Dekker, “Northward Ho,”
the joint work of Dekker and Webster, and “The Changeling,” ascribed
to Middleton, who was probably aided in it by Rowley. A comparison of
these plays should give a very fair account of a seventeenth century
lunatic asylum.[32:2]

It is not difficult to obtain admission to this asylum, for the
charge is only a penny or twopence, and Bellamont and his friends
in “Northward Ho” look at the “mad Greeks” for a short time before
calling for their horses, which are stabled at “the Dolphin without
Bishopsgate” near by. The hospital consists of “a parlour, kitchen,
and larder below stairs, and twenty-one rooms where the poor distracted
people lie, and above stairs eight rooms more for servants”; the madmen
may either be visited in their cells, or brought in for inspection
by the visitors. Preferring the former alternative we approach the
cells, and hear a confused roaring—“the Chimes of Bedlam.” It is
“Mad Bess roaring for meat or the Englishman for drink”; like “bells
rung backward” they are nothing but “confusion and mere noises.” The
“shaking of irons” adds to the din, which is increased by the snatches
of coarse song which are continually assailing our ears, the playing of
rough games such as “barley-break,” the running and jumping of the more
violent of the patients, and the cries of those who are undergoing a
treatment of the whip:

                          “If sad, they cry,
    If mirth be their conceit, they laugh again;
    Sometimes they imitate the beasts and birds,
    Singing or howling, braying, barking, all
    As their wild fancies prompt ’em.”

When the lunatics are brought in, or (as was more usual in real life
though unsuited for dramatic representation), we visit them in their
“cages” or cells, we are confronted with a strange sight. A “pretty
poet” who “ran mad for a chambermaid” invokes Titania and Oberon,
and speaks in the sanest of tones of “daisies, primrose, violets”;
his madness, though at the time we do not know it, is feigned. The
Englishman is still crying for drink. Everyone must go down on his
knees and pledge him: “A thousand pots, and froth ’em, froth ’em!” The
parson, “that run mad for tithe goslings,” threatens to excommunicate
and curse the whole company. A musician walks slowly and deliberately
apart; he fell mad “for love of an Italian dwarf.” Many a lunatic
resembles Candido, “much gone indeed,” who believes himself to be a
prentice, “talks to himself,” selling “pure calicos, fine hollands,
choice cambrics, neat lawns,” and resenting interference in a way which
is positively dangerous. Near him is a lad brought in (like Alinda) “a
little craz’d, distracted” and not suffering acutely; he is allowed
comparative freedom and accorded light treatment till more dangerous
symptoms shew themselves. He

                        “talks little idly
    And therefore has the freedom of the house.”

We speak to the keepers about their charges, and they seem mildly
interested. The most entertaining characters we may discuss at length
with them; and, if we will brave their foul talk, we may even converse
with the patients as freely as they are permitted to converse with
each other. We must be prepared, in this case, to hear frank comments
on our personal appearance and the wildest of guesses, often mere
expressions of an _idée fixe_ on our profession or our business. The
lunatics will not, of course, allow that they are mad, though they may
recognise that they are ill and under a doctor’s care. This, however,
is less common with our asylum patients than with those undergoing
private treatment, such as Ford’s Meleander. The mere suggestion
that they may be of unsound mind usually amuses them, or makes them
indignant. It is only when the keeper ceases to reproach them with
madness and turns the conversation to “Whips!” that they become serious
again. Perhaps, after all, a talk with the keeper will best serve our
purpose.

Friar Anselmo is at hand and will describe to us with more sympathy
than many of his kind the condition of the inmates:

    “There are of madmen, as there are of tame,
     All humoured not alike. We have here some
     So apish and fantastic, play with a feather;
     And, though ’twould grieve a soul to see God’s image
     So blemished and defaced, yet they do act
     Such antic and such pretty lunacies,
     That, spite of sorrow, they will make you smile.
     Others, again, we have, like hungry lions,
     Fierce as wild bulls, untameable as flies;
     And these have oftentimes from strangers’ sides
     Snatch’d rapiers suddenly and done much harm;
     Whom if you’ll see, you must be weaponless.”

We may ask him about his treatment of these poor creatures, who are
ever in fear of the lash. It will be easily justified:

    “They must be used like children; pleased with toys,
     And anon whipt for their unruliness.”

Alternate cajolings and threats are the mildest form of treatment that
we can hope to see in these places. The Elizabethan asylum keeper holds
with Shakespeare that

                  “Diseases desperate grown
    By desperate appliance are relieved
    Or not at all.”

In the middle of this entertaining discussion we are interrupted. A
prospective patient, it seems, is being announced, but the first words
of the Master, who enters with him, suggest that we have been fortunate
enough to meet with a case of false incarceration. A scholarly young
man has been confined without cause and his friends in high quarters
have come, armed with a “discharge from my lord cardinal,” to demand
his release. “I am heartily sorry,” says the Master, “If ye allow him
sound, pray take him with ye.” A gentleman protests that there is
nothing in the Scholar

                    “light nor tainted,
    No startings nor no rubs in all his answers;
    In all his letters nothing but discretion,
    Learning and handsome style.”

He is quite “perfect”; “a civiler discourser I ne’er talked with.”
Then, before the Master, the Scholar is catechised:

“You find no sickness?” “Do ye sleep o’ nights?” “Have you no fearful
dreams?” The answers, to the Master’s disgust, are satisfactory. “I
think,” exclaims the friend, “You keep him here to teach him madness.”
But, just then, his “eyes alter,” and

    “On a sudden, from some word or other.
     When no man could expect a fit, he has flown out.”

The mention of “stubborn weather” and “strange work at sea,” starts in
him a new delusion or revives an old one. He rants and raves: “I am
Neptune.” Now it is the Master’s turn to jeer, and the visitors retire,
discomfited.

It may be noticed, in passing, that the questions addressed by the
keepers of madhouses to prospective patients in order to ascertain
whether or no they are indeed mad are hardly less irrelevant and
absurd than those of “Sir Topas” in “Twelfth Night.” Antonio, in the
“Changeling,” is asked as “easy questions”: “How many true (_i.e._
honest) fingers has a tailor on his right hand?” . . . “and how many
on both?”—“How many fools goes to a wise man?” These remind us of the
questions put by the Fool to King Lear.

Our madhouse does not contain only those lunatics who are termed
“madmen”; there is another variety, known most commonly as the “fool.”
Now the word “fool,” in Elizabethan literature, has a number of
connotations. It may be used, as in Shakespeare, for the professional
jester of the court, who was, indeed, often a little wanting in
ordinary intelligence, though this was amply atoned for by his witty
and pregnant remarks. It is also used in a general sense, as to-day,
of a person who has acted, or who habitually acts, in an unwise way.
With reference, however, to our plays, it has more often approximately
the technical meaning of “imbecile”—a term used of those whose brains
are constitutionally affected and whose insanity is therefore rather a
quantitative rather than a qualitative defect. Taken in this sense, the
word “fool” may be applied to some of the asylum’s inmates, the word
“madman” to others. The two classes are not always well distinguished
in these plays, but the fools can generally be detected by the inanity,
rather than the violence, of their words and actions. They tend to
reply in the style of Antonio, the feigning fool of “The Changeling”—

    “He, he, he! well, I thank you, cousin, he, he, he!”

To which Lollio, the attendant, replies: “He can laugh; I perceive by
that he is no beast.”

The two classes of patients are apparently allowed to mix in each
others’ company. “We have,” says Lollio, “two sorts of people in the
house, and both under the whip, that’s fools and madmen; the one has
not wit enough to be knaves, and the other not knavery enough to be
fools.” They are kept under very much the same discipline, though the
fools are sent to the “Fools’ College”—which is an institution of the
madhouse itself—and are put to school in various classes in the hope
of improving their wit.

The seventeenth-century asylum, it must be remembered, claims to
have worked cures, though at first it seems hard to believe that its
designation as “the school where those that lose their wits Practise
again to get them” is anything more than a phrase. As we enter the
domain of Anselmo we are met by a “sweeper,” who describes himself as
one of the “implements” of the house—“a mad wag myself here once; but
I thank father Anselmo, he lashed me into my right mind again.”

We are struck at once, as we read these accounts of Bedlam, by the
inconsequence, verging at times on brutal heartlessness, with which
those responsible for the lunatics’ welfare refer to them. It is the
expression of that spirit upon which we have remarked continually
throughout this historical survey. In concluding it we can hardly
illustrate this last point better than by considering a few of the
occasions on which the mad folk are held up to ridicule or satire. It
is, of course, the dramatist with whom we have properly to reckon for
this, yet he was clearly influenced by the attitude of the time, and
contemporary prose-references endorse the spirit of the plays.

Satire abounds on the coarsest of subjects—that of the “horn-mad”
patient—and further examples need hardly be given. More interesting is
the comment of the keeper in the “Pilgrim” when a patient enters crying
“Give me some drink.”

                      “Oh, there’s the Englishman! . . .
    These English are so malt-mad there’s no meddling with ’em;
    When they have a fruitful year of barley there,
    All the whole island’s thus.”

A similar skit follows on the parson above-mentioned “that run mad for
tithe goslings.” But Fletcher’s best effort in this direction is the
introduction of the Welshman, who, but for his premature exit might
have served as quite a reasonable understudy for Fluellen. “Whaw,
Master Keeper,” is his first remark, “Give me some ceeze and onions,
give me some wash brew . . . Pendragon was a shentleman, marg you, sir.
And the organs at Rixum were made by revelations: There is a spirit
blows the bellows, and then they sing.” He will “sing, dance and do
anything,” and when the Englishman and the Scholar challenge him, he
threatens to “get upon a mountain and call my countrymen.” Dekker, in
the “Honest Whore,” is able to hit the lawyers. There are none of that
company, he says, among Anselmo’s madmen. “We dare not let a lawyer
come in, for he’ll make ’em mad faster than we can recover ’em.”
Questioned as to how long it takes to “recover” any of the patients,
our informant replies that “An alderman’s son will be mad a great
while. . . . A whore will hardly come to her wits again. A Puritan,
there’s no hope of him, unless he may pull down the steeple and hang
himself i’ the bell-ropes.”[41:1]


FOOTNOTES:

[8:1] I. Samuel, xvi., 14.

[9:1] “Macbeth,” i., 3, 84.

[10:1] “Twelfth Night,” iv., 2.

[10:2] “King Lear,” iii., 4, etc.

[11:1] “King Lear,” iii., 4, 52, etc.

[11:2] Ibid., iv., 1, 64.

[11:3] Ibid., iii., 4, 122.

[11:4] Ibid., iii., 4, 148-9.

[11:5] Ibid., iii., 5, 31.

[11:6] Middleton: “A Fair Quarrel,” i., 1.

[12:1] iii., 2.

[12:2] i., 1.

[12:3] “Othello,” v., 2, 109.

[12:4] iii., 3.

[12:5] iii., 6. Cf. with these the phrases: “planet-struck,”
“planet-stricken,” etc.; _e.g._ Brome’s “City Wit,” v., 1—Crazy: “Sure
I was planet-struck.”

[14:1] For further information on this subject Bulleine’s “Bulwark of
Defence” and Sir Thomas Browne’s “Vulgar Errors” may be consulted.

[14:2] Act iii. Sc. iv., cf. Jonson: “The Alchemist,” ii., i. Face of
Dol:

        “She is a most rare scholar,
    And is gone mad with studying Broughton’s works.
    If you but name a word touching the Hebrew
    She falls into her fit and will discourse
    So learnedly of genealogies,
    As you would run mad, too, to hear her, sir.”

[15:1] “Much Ado About Nothing,” ii., 1, 368.

[15:2] “Comedy of Errors,” v., 1, 68.

[15:3] For further information on this interesting word see the New
English Dictionary. _s.v._ “horn-mad.”

[16:1] “Law Tricks,” iv., 2.

[16:2] “Merry Wives of Windsor,” iii., 5, 153.

[16:3] “Match Me in London,” iv., 1.

[17:1] All taken from plays of the period under consideration.

[17:2] “Taming of the Shrew,” Ind. ii., 135.

[18:1] “Duchess of Malfi,” iv., 2.

[18:2] “Troilus and Cressida,” ii., 3, 92.

[19:1] “Epicene,” iv., 2.

[19:2] “Hamlet,” iii., 4, 139, etc.

[19:3] “Philaster,” iv., 3, 45, etc.

[20:1] “Comedy of Errors,” iv., 4, 52-3.

[20:2] Ibid., l. 96.

[20:3] “Honest Whore,” iv., 3.

[20:4] “Hamlet,” iii., 1, 7.

[21:1] “King John,” iii., 4, 48, etc.

[21:2] “Twelfth Night,” iv., 3, 1, etc.

[21:3] “Lover’s Melancholy,” ii., 2.

[21:4] “Duchess of Malfi,” iv., 2.

[22:1] “Hamlet,” ii., 2, 212.

[22:2] Ibid., ii., 2, 6-7.

[22:3] Ibid., iv., 5, 4, etc.

[23:1] “Lover’s Melancholy,” iii., 1.

[23:2] “Epicene,” iv., 2.

[23:3] “Honest Whore,” v., 1.

[23:4] “Hamlet,” iii., 1, 171.

[24:1] “Lover’s Melancholy,” iii., 1.

[24:2] “Hamlet,” ii., 2, 93.

[25:1] _e.g._ A lunatic’s legal acts were annulled and his property was
placed under control. (See further, Encyl. Brit., _s.v._ Insanity.)

[25:2] “Epicene,” ii., 1.

[25:3] “The Changeling,” iii., 3.

[26:1] “King Lear,” ii., 3, 13, etc.

[28:1] “As You Like It,” iii., 2, 420, etc.

[28:2] “Much Ado About Nothing,” v., 1, 24, etc.

[29:1] “Romeo and Juliet,” i., 2, 54, etc.

[29:2] Shirley: “Bird in a Cage,” ii., 1.

[30:1] Notably into “Northward Ho.” The madhouses of “The Pilgrim,”
“The Honest Whore,” and “The Changeling” are private asylums.

[31:1] Stow: “Survey of London” (Clarendon Press), i., 137.

[32:1] Ibid., ii., 98.

[32:2] The chief sources from which this description is compiled
are:—“The Pilgrim,” iii. 6, iv. 3, v. 5; “The Honest Whore,” v. 12,
13; “The Changeling,” i. 2, iii. 3, iv. 3, v. 3; “Northward Ho,” iv. 1.
For obvious reasons the specific references to every quotation are not
given.

[41:1] Another interesting passage, no doubt satirical, but too long
for quotation at length, occurs in “The Duchess of Malfi,” Act iv., Sc.
2: It begins:

    “A mad lawyer and a secular priest
     A doctor that hath forfeited his wits
     By jealousy,” etc., etc.




CHAPTER III.

THE PRESENTATION OF MADNESS—FROM THE STANDPOINT OF LITERATURE.

                  “This mirthful comic style
    Makes us at once both serious, and smile.”

                                                    (_Alex. Brome._)


The questions which we have now to answer, before passing to our main
study and considering the mad folk as individuals, are two in number.
The first is a general one: What is the place of such a feature as
madness in drama? The second is more particular: What place does
madness assume in the body of drama under consideration? Let us take
them in this order.

1. Clearly there is a great difference between madness in tragedy and
madness in comedy. Many of us would hold to the one and emphatically
despise the other. At all events, risking confusion through an
over-complicated scheme of sub-division, we shall deal with each
separately.

The representation of madness in tragedy might be objected to upon the
following grounds: If carried out well, it becomes too terrible for the
stage; if badly, it is nothing but a ludicrous caricature of greatness.
This is at least plausible, and the last proposition is evidently true.
But what of the first? Is madness really too terrible for dramatic
presentation, or is it not eminently suited to the stage by virtue of
its peculiar qualities?

The critic replies that madness is sheer suffering of the most painful
sort, that the ravings of a noble mind o’erthrown have passed the _ne
plus ultra_ of the tragic, while the babblings of mere imbecility
have not reached the level of tragedy at all. “Such suffering” (he
will say), “as is the lot of Lear, should never be dwelt upon,
much less paraded before crowds, and decked out with the tinsel
of the stage. Think of physical suffering comparable with it, if
that be possible—for is not mental suffering far more terrible and
heart-rending than physical?—and you would never talk of putting the
maniac on the stage. Think of the repulsion caused by the blinding of
Gloster and the murder of Lady Macduff’s infant son,—and is not the
madness of Lear more terrible? ‘King Lear’ is, of course, a brilliant
exception, but the exception proves the rule.”

With this last provoking platitude we need not quarrel, but the main
assertion must be challenged nevertheless. In the first place it is
a fact that we do not feel the same repulsion at the representation
of madness on the stage as we do at a similar case in real life,
whereas with physical brutality the effect seems in drama to be almost
magnified. Could we possibly feel more keenly the blow which Othello
gives to Desdemona if the scene took place in our own family? It is
at least doubtful. But if we think of the suffering of Lear, or of
Ophelia, and suppose one-tenth of it inflicted on our dearest friend,
the thought becomes perfectly unbearable. It is not that we do not
enter into the spirit of “King Lear,” but rather that the sufferings of
the aged King, by reason of their very remoteness from human life, give
us the actual “tragic feeling” which Shakespearean tragedy inevitably
produces.

Not only so, but the state of the madman, provided that apart from him
the play contains the requisite tragic hero, is admirably calculated
to contribute, through the emotions of pity and fear, to that καθάρσις
which Aristotle considers to be the essence of tragedy. Tragic
pity will most surely be excited at the misfortunes of “one who is
undeserving,” that is of

                            “a man
    More sinn’d against than sinning.”

Hardly any disaster which may befall a human being can excite such
tragic pity as the crowning disaster of insanity. Whatever a man’s
sins, we feel that the loss of reason more than atones for them all.
If the greatest villain in drama should lose his reason, we should
feel this; when Lear, the rash, impetuous King of Britain, becomes
insane, we cry out, forgetting for the time his tragic error, that
his punishment is too great for him. When the brief scene is ended we
consign him to the Great Silence, not with feelings of rebellion but
with a sense of supreme calm:

                        “He hates him
    That would upon the rack of this tough world
    Stretch him out longer.”[45:1]

So equally with tragic fear. This emotion, which is no vulgar sense
of possible or impending misfortune to ourselves, but an awed and
sympathetic feeling for a character essentially of the nature of our
own, is brought out to the full by means of the portrayal of madness.
For what reduces men so quickly to the same level as the loss of reason
by a fellow-man? In real life our hearts are stirred by compassion,
yet moved by inexpressible awe, as we see or hear of one whom we have
known and whose senses have deserted him. Be he of high or low station,
it matters nothing. Differences of rank are forgotten—and this is
less often so with physical calamity. Loss of reason has effected
the belated recognition of our common humanity. Carry this into the
imaginative world of drama, and you have the emotion of tragic fear.

The representation, then, of madness in tragedy would seem to be
not only permissible, but of the greatest value to the drama when
this madness is worked into the plot and becomes an essential part
of it. Often, however, and especially with the lesser lights of the
Elizabethan stage, it held a place wholly subsidiary to the main theme
of the tragedy. If tragic fear and tragic pity were to be evoked it
would be by other means; madness was required for colouring effects,
and to lend a peculiar atmosphere to the tragedy. It was sketched but
lightly, frequently with little attempt at reality; whether this arose
from the dramatists’ lack of ability, or from a desire to lessen the
supposed pain, can only be a matter of conjecture. The introduction
of madness, as a subsidiary element, into tragedy, appears to be
justifiable only when it is regarded objectively with no relation to
the pain caused to the sufferer. Let us illustrate. The Duchess of
Malfi, previously to her death, is made to listen to the cries and to
watch the antics of madmen. The intention of the author is evident.
Whether we consider him to have been successful or not, we can hardly
cavil at his device when we bear in mind the nature of the tragedy.
But had a madman been introduced and presented as a new character
with a definite interest of his own, either at this or at an earlier
stage of the play, we should have rightly condemned the new feature as
inartistic and revolting, for our centre of gravity, so to say, would
at once have been shifted from the unfortunate lady to the unfortunate
madman. The conception of madness in tragedy is a powerful one and
cannot be trifled with.

There is another point of view from which the question must be
considered before we pass from tragedy to comedy,—namely, that of
the action. It is recognised that in tragedy properly so called the
conflict must spring from the actions of the hero, and that the
calamity which marks the tragedy must be unmistakeably dependent upon
this generating action. Now the hero, to commit a tragic error, must
obviously be responsible for his actions,—otherwise the tragedy
will rest upon an irrational basis, which would be absurd. No
abnormal mental state, then, such as would arise from drunkenness,
hallucination, or insanity, can serve to generate the conflict. The
most usual and natural position for the introduction of insanity will
be either during a considerable part of the decline of the action from
the crisis (as with Ophelia’s madness in “Hamlet”)[47:1] or immediately
preceding the catastrophe (cf. the sleep-walking of Lady Macbeth), when
it adds greatly to the force of the tragedy. The construction of “King
Lear” is in this respect peculiar. Lear’s madness, to the ordinary
spectator, is first noticeable in the third act;[47:2] but, as Dr.
Bradley points out, it is more satisfactory from the point of view of
the construction to consider, not Lear, but Goneril, Edmund and Regan,
as the leading characters in the play.[48:1]

What of madness in comedy? This, we confess, it is difficult, if not
impossible, to justify. Feigned madness may, no doubt, have some
place in a comedy, and such tricks as occur in “Northward Ho!” where
the poet Bellamont narrowly escapes being immured in a madhouse,
may, and certainly did appeal to a certain kind of audience. But the
introduction of Bedlam into a romance such as “The Pilgrim,” or a
comedy of low life such as “The Changeling,” merely for the sake of
giving some cheap amusement to the groundlings, reveals a mind which
one would suppose to be untouched by the elements of human pity. It
can only be understood in the light of the treatment accorded to the
lunatic in real life. And our authors’ sins do not end here. In more
than one comedy in which the madman appears, little or no attempt is
made to give even an approximate idea of what he might be expected to
say or do. His presence is merely an excuse for the coarsest of jokes
and the vilest of songs, which, no doubt, lost nothing in the acting.
The degradation of a theme which is properly tragic is unhappily
only what may be expected from playwrights whose work graced the
Post-Restoration stage.

In tragi-comedy, it may be said, madness has a legitimate place, and we
find the authors of “The Two Noble Kinsmen,” among others, making full
use of it. We shall best see, when we consider this play separately,
how impossible it is to reconcile madness with the dénouement of
comedy. We may be able to put a hook into the nose of leviathan, but
we can no more use the sufferings of mad folk and then bring them to a
dénouement, in a tragi-comedy worthy of the name, than we can supply
a “happy ending” to “Hamlet” or “Lear.” The heights of mania are very
high, as the depths of idiocy are very low. The maniac, though cured
of his disease, does not fit into comedy, any more than the imbecile,
however well-born, can harmonise with tragedy. From one point of view
at least, a great man is at his greatest when he is possessed by an
uncontrollable passion. If the madman of a tragi-comedy is sufficiently
great for tragedy, the play cannot be resolved into a comedy; if he is
not a possible tragic hero, his madness is not sufficiently imposing to
raise the conflict to a crisis. We are on the horns of a dilemma which
may be avoided in practice by some dramatic genius, but which were
certainly not avoided in Elizabethan drama by those authors who rushed
in where others might fear to tread.

2. We have now to enquire into the actual presentation of madness in
our tragedy and comedy, and it must be confessed at once that the
results will be somewhat disappointing. We have between twenty and
thirty plays of which it may fairly be said that the conception of
madness enters definitely into the plot, and of this number all, save
four or five, are comedies. The tragedies may briefly be considered
first.

In “King Lear,” mad folk are given an exalted place. On the madness of
the old King depends the whole play; the scenes which are naturally
the most striking become more terrible because of his ravings; their
effect is further enhanced by the feigned madness of Edgar and by the
curious half-imbecility of the Fool. In “Hamlet” the hero’s assumption
of an “antic disposition” is inextricably interwoven with the main
plot, while Ophelia’s loss of reason is largely responsible for the
catastrophe. Nowhere else in Elizabethan Tragedy do we find so bold a
use of the madman as here. Turn to “The Changeling” and Middleton’s
ideas of what can be done with him take shape. There is a comic
underplot, alternating during the greater part of the play with a fine
tragic theme, and only becoming connected with it towards the end—this
underplot embodies the grossest of all possible conceptions of madness.
From a sublime passion, it becomes material for vulgar intrigue. Even
where mad folk are seriously treated in these tragedies, they are not
portrayed with the power of which the author is capable. Penthea, for
example, in Ford’s “Broken Heart,” though not, as has been suggested,
a mere reminiscence of Ophelia, is somewhat slightly and inadequately
drawn. And one would at least have expected Webster, with his penchant
towards the carnival of horrors, to have produced something better than
the inane songs and dances which, with hardly the saving grace of being
grotesque, disfigure the fourth act of the “Duchess of Malfi.” The fact
is that the common Elizabethan treatment of insanity was so far removed
from the humane that the subject was regarded rather as one for mirth
than for solemnity—for comedy and not for tragedy.

Reconciling ourselves as best we can to this state of things, let us
examine some representative comedies. There are, in the first place,
those in which insanity plays quite a subsidiary part and is not in the
least essential to the main plot. In “The Silent Woman,” for example,
the pretended madness of Morose is an occasion for much merriment,
but it lasts only for part of a scene. In “Northward Ho!”, Maybery,
Greenshield and their friends lay a merry plot against Bellamont and
contrive to secure his arrest as a madman, though here again, the jest
is but a short one. Similarly, in “Twelfth Night,” Malvolio is treated
as if he were insane, much to the delight of Maria, Sir Toby, and
the lesser folk; while in the “Comedy of Errors” many accusations of
madness are bandied to and fro, which more than once lead to violence.
Sometimes the madness is only reported. In “Cymbeline,” the Queen is
said in the fourth act to be afflicted by

    “A fever with the absence of her son,
     A madness of which her life’s in danger,”

and there is little doubt that her violent death, “most
shameless-desperate,” was due to some derangement of the reason. So,
too, the Lady Constance dies “in a frenzy,” and Brutus’ Portia, it is
reported,

                          “fell distract
    And, her attendants absent, swallow’d fire.”

Such scenes as these last three, however, Shakespeare has, with his
usual tact, kept off the stage, knowing that in the case of “Cymbeline”
he would otherwise introduce too violent a nemesis into what was
rapidly becoming the dénouement of a romantic comedy. Massinger, on
the contrary, in “A New Way to Pay Old Debts,” seems rather to welcome
this nemesis, allowing his extortioner, Sir Giles Overreach, when
outwitted in the fifth act, to go mad and to be taken off to Bedlam.
It will be noticed that most of the examples just given (excluding
those of “reported” insanity) have been mainly of pretended madness;
where bona-fide mad folk are introduced into comedy without affecting
the construction of the play, this is usually for the sake of a vulgar
realism or of comic effect falsely so-called. We have already seen
enough of this and may pass on.

In “Bartholomew Fair” we have a madman delineated with some care.
Trouble-all, the lunatic in question, only makes his appearance
in the fourth act, but from his entry to the close of the play he
evokes, together with Quarlous, who masquerades in his clothes, a
considerable share of attention. His place in the plot is an important
one. Dame Purecraft, who is being wooed by that notorious Puritan,
Zeal-of-the-Land Busy, and by a gentleman named Winwife, has had it
foretold that she must marry a madman within seven days. She has been
daily to Bedlam to enquire if any insane gentlemen are available, but
it is only when she meets Trouble-all that she feels any inclination
towards one. By a trick, however, Quarlous, a “gamester” and a friend
of Winwife’s, succeeds in duping and eventually marrying the Dame,
and although Trouble-all discovers the ruse, all ends happily. It will
be seen, when a sketch of the madman is attempted on another page, how
carefully the lunatic is portrayed.

It is needless to examine all the comedies in which the madman is more
intricately interwoven with the plot than in “Bartholomew Fair,” for
the work is seldom done with any appreciable dramatic skill, or with
the least vestige of sympathy. The plot of “The Mad Lover,” a play
in Fletcher’s worst style, will serve as a typical example. Madness
here forms the basis and theme of the plot. Memnon, a valiant general
somewhat advanced in years, albeit a blunt, uncourtly fellow, has
returned from his victories to the Court of Paphos. He falls in love
with Calis, the King’s sister, who is herself in love with Memnon’s
brother, Polydore. The General proposes in truly singular fashion; his
courtship begins and ends with three remarks: “I love thee, lady,”
“With all my heart I love thee,” and finally, “Good lady, kiss me!”
Calis, supposing not unnaturally that he is mad, ignores him; when she
has left the room, the Mad Lover suddenly grows quarrelsome, talks
wildly, and declares that his suit shall succeed. Calis, re-entering,
is held up, and, growing fearful, tries to humour him, but he rushes
from her presence with wild threats. In the next act, we find him
contemplating death for the purpose of presenting his lady with his
heart. This announcement of his project sends more than one of his
friends to plead for him with the Princess. Meanwhile, Polydore, who
has overheard his brother entreating the surgeon to cut out his heart
and seen the surgeon beat a hasty retreat, concludes that the “cause is
merely heat” and contrives a double expedient. For Memnon he dresses
up another woman as the Princess, in the hope that he may be satisfied
with her; at the same time, he reports to Calis that Memnon has carried
out his threat and makes believe to present the General’s heart in a
cup together with some verses from her “dead” lover. This makes her a
little remorseful. But Memnon refuses to be deceived, and it is only
when Polydore himself pretends to be dead that the Princess is induced
to change her mind and marry Memnon. Instantly the Mad Lover becomes
sane, and all is well.

Of the tragi-comedies into which this theme is introduced we may take
two—“The Lover’s Melancholy” and “Match Me in London”—as being
representative. Each shows some improvement on the “Mad Lover.” The
“Lover’s Melancholy” is based, as the name partly implies, on the
melancholy of Palador, Prince of Cyprus, whose love Eroclea has
“disappeared,” though in reality she is present in disguise during the
whole play. The plot turns on the situation caused by the heroine’s
secret presence. Among the disasters occasioned by her “loss” is the
madness of her father, Meleander; his recovery, in the fifth act, is
the best part of that act, the Prince having rediscovered his love long
before (iv., 3.). Dr. Ward considers that the melancholy of Palador
“recalls Hamlet.”[56:1] The young Prince is certainly an interesting
character, and the curtness of his exclamations and replies, together
with the natural grace of his disposition, afford quite a noticeable
contrast with the now coherent, now raving old father. Both characters
are intimately connected with the plot; and both present traits, as
will be seen, which are fully in harmony with their conditions. It only
remains to wish that Ford had not been inspired by Burton, and that the
zealous physician Corax had refrained from presenting the Prince with
that “trifle” of his “own brain,” to wit, the tedious and unnecessary
“Masque of Melancholy.”

It may at first appear a violent anti-climax to come to Dekker’s “Match
Me in London.” Nevertheless the working into the plot of Tormiella’s
feigned madness is quite in the true dramatic spirit, and one scene
leaves us a little suspicious, as is so often the case with the
plays of Shakespeare’s contemporaries, of the influence of Ophelia.
Tormiella is a young shopkeeper’s wife whom the King tries to seduce;
he visits her in disguise and she is beguiled away, with the compliance
of her father. The situation develops thus: Malevento, Tormiella’s
father, rushes on the stage, crying out that his daughter has lost her
reason:[57:1]

    _Mal._  O royal Sir, my daughter Tormiella
            Has lost her use of reason and gone mad.

    _King._ When?

    _Mal._  Not half an hour since.

    _King._ Mad now! now frantic!
            When all my hopes are at the highest pitch
            To enjoy her beauties! talk no more; thou liest.

                                                   [_Enter Gazetto._

    _Gaz._  May it please your Majesty—

    _King._ Curses consume thee—oh—                [_Strikes him._

    _Gaz._  It is dispatch’d, the Queen is lost, never to be found.

    _King._ Wave upon wave,
            Hard-hearted Furies, when will you dig my grave?
            You do not hear him, thunder shakes Heaven first.
            Before dull earth can feel it:—
            My dear, dear’st Queen is dead.

The King is distracted. “Without a woman,” he says, he will himself
“run mad at midnight.” The physician is to use his “skill,” but if that
prove unavailing the King’s resolve is taken nevertheless.

                            “I will marry
    The lunatic lady, she shall be my Queen,
    Proclaim her so.”[58:1]

So saying, he leaves the room, and almost simultaneously Tormiella
enters. She plays the madwoman for some time before the physician;
but, discovering at length that he is in reality an agent for her
husband, she reveals her sanity to him, together with the reasons for
her assumption of madness. The action hurries on from this point with
increasing rapidity; and, after several plots have been thwarted, the
dead come to life and sinners are converted, after the approved manner
of romantic comedy. But enough has been said to shew how the somewhat
vulgar plot is given a startling and unexpected turn, at a point where,
to tell the truth, it is badly needed. The actual “mad scene” is
extremely short, but it serves a true dramatic purpose and is far from
being the worst thing in the play. We are a long way from the comic
scenes of the “Changeling” and the “Honest Whore” of Dekker himself.

In these few pages we have briefly considered the places occupied
by mad folk in some of the most representative of our tragedies and
comedies. In many of them sublime passion is degraded for the most
vulgar of purposes; in many more there is little attempt to realise the
nature of insanity—mere surface work, a “writing down” to the lowest
type of contemporary play-goer. Such prostitution of art appears to us,
in the light of Shakespeare’s plays and of our own opinions, unworthy
and base. Yet it must not be forgotten that many of the “madhouse
scenes” of our plays contain much genuine humour which from the point
of view of the day was harmless and legitimate. And as we have already
agreed to take up, as far as possible, the position of the author
himself, we shall restrain our Puritanical or artistic indignation,
and pass on to consider our mad folk themselves, as men and women
rather than as puppets of a playwright, from the point of view not of
construction but of character.


FOOTNOTES:

[45:1] “King Lear,” v., 3, 313.

[47:1] Taking the Play Scene (iii., 2.) as the crisis.

[47:2] Indeed many critics find incipient madness in Lear’s conduct
even earlier, _i.e._ from the very beginning of the play. This view I
cannot hold; Lear’s actions in the early part of the play do not seem
to me to be the result of anything but the childishness of old age. The
King is quite responsible for his actions. If he were not, he would be
the one exception to Shakespeare’s practice in his tragedies.

[48:1] Sh. Trag., p. 53.

[56:1] Eng. Dram. Lit.: Vol. ii., p. 297.

[57:1] “Match Me in London,” Act v., Sc. 1.

[58:1] Ibid., v., 1.




CHAPTER IV.

MAD FOLK IN COMEDY AND TRAGEDY—(i.) THE MANIACS.

    “Whom if you’ll see, you must be weaponless.”

                                               (_The Honest Whore._)


In the division of our study upon which we have now entered, the
various figures of madmen will be considered under some five or
six headings. We shall naturally exclude the mere crowds of madmen
who enter the plays as lay figures rather than as personalities of
the drama. The largest of the remaining classes will be dealt with
first, namely, that which includes “maniacs,” or “madmen” in the
proper acceptation of the term. Next come the half-witted, who will
not detain us long; then the melancholiacs, who appear so frequently
that they demand a section to themselves; next those suffering from
hallucinations and delusions, who have not perhaps crossed the
border-line, or who exhibit abnormal symptoms which can hardly be
included in the term insanity, though they are very near it. Lastly,
there is a group of pretenders,—of whom Hamlet and Edgar are the
chief,—members of which attract our attention in several other plays.

Greene’s Orlando, a rude and undeveloped character, whose frenzy is
quite conventional, may be briefly mentioned by way of prelude. His
ravings are composed mainly of scraps of classical lore: “Woods, trees,
leaves; leaves, trees, woods, tria sequuntur tria; ergo optimus vir
non est optimus magistratus, a peny for a pote of beer and sixe pence
for a peec of beife? wounds! what am I the worse? O Minerva! salve;
good morrow; how do you to-day? Sweet goddesse, now I see thou lovest
thy ulisses, lovely Minerva, tell thy ulisses, will Jove send Mercury
to Calipso to lett me goe?”[61:1] It will be seen that Greene has no
idea of making his madman anything more than a source of amusement. His
violence is noteworthy: more than once he “beats” those who listen to
his ravings. Scraps of incident like the fight with Brandimant, King of
the Isles, are highly significant:

    _Brandimant._ “Frantic companion, lunatic and wood,
                   Get thee hence, or else I vow by heaven,
                   Thy madness shall not privilege thy life.”

                    [_Alarum. They fight. Orlando kills Brandimant._

The following dialogue, too, is delightfully naïve:

    _Enter Tom and Ralph._

    _Ralph._   O Tom, look where he is! Call him madman.

    _Tom._     Madman, Madman.

    _Ralph._   Madman, Madman.

    _Orlando._ What say’st thou, villain?              [_Beats him._

It only remains to add that after being treated for his disease by
Melissa, a witch—she sprinkles, among other things, many Latin verses
over him—Orlando recovers his sanity, and cries:

    “Sirrah, how came I thus disguis’d,
     Like mad Orestes, quaintly thus attir’d?”

A more serious study of insanity, in a work of that unbridled force
which characterised the University Wits, is Kyd’s portrayal of
Hieronimo and Isabella.[62:1]

Hieronimo, Marshal of Spain, whose son Horatio has been murdered by
the King’s nephew, Lorenzo, is stricken with insanity as a result of
the shock; his lunacy is intermittent (closely akin to the disease
known as manic depressive insanity), but it is only right to add that
this result is largely due to the addition of certain scenes to the
play by another hand. Kyd represents Hieronimo as afflicted by a deep
melancholy which is only a later phase of his grief and in no way
prevents him from doing his ordinary duties; the scenes in which his
ravings are at their wildest are commonly attributed to Ben Jonson. It
is therefore of little use attempting to trace any regular development
of Hieronimo’s madness; a short account of it will suffice.

It breaks out, not when entering the arbour “in his shirt, etc.,” he
first discovers his murdered son, but after he has cut him down from
the tree on which he has been hanged, and has lamented the murder with
his wife. All his ravings, as we are told later in the play, are of
Horatio.

    “His heart is quiet—like a desp’rate man,
     Grows lunatic and childish for his son.
     Sometimes, as he doth at his table sit,
     He speaks as if Horatio stood by him;
     Then, starting in a rage, falls on the earth,
     Cries out ‘Horatio, where is my Horatio?’
     So that with extreme grief and cutting sorrow
     There is not left in him one inch of man.”[63:1]

At the conclusion of the scene the distracted father is made to recite
some Latin verses, usually attributed to Kyd himself. Hieronimo’s
“tragical speeches” do not again reveal a mind unhinged, until the
eleventh scene of the third act, where the interpolator is once more
busy. This, however, occurring as it does in Kyd’s part of the play,
where the Marshal is still sane, must not be mistaken for a sign of
madness. He utters the word “son.” In his disordered brain this starts
a train of bewildered reasoning. “My son, and what’s a son?”—he
debates the question dispassionately until he once more remembers his
loss. Then his grief breaks forth: he rants of Nemesis and Furies,
murder and confusion, and even in Kyd’s work we now see that “this man
is passing lunatic.” From this point onwards Hieronimo pursues his
course of revenge with all the dogged cunning of real madness. His
violence surprises the King, who is ignorant of its cause. He digs with
his dagger; he would “rip the bowels of the earth.” “Stand from about
me,” he cries to the courtiers,

    “I’ll make a pickaxe of my poniard
     And here surrender up my marshalship;
     For I’ll go marshal up the fiends in hell,
     To be avenged on you all for this.”[64:1]

The next scene—an interpolation—is the weirdest and perhaps the most
effective in the play. Tormented by delusions of spirits, yet hotly
denying his madness even while raving on all kinds of topics, Hieronimo
is confronted with a painter, Bazardo. Ever mindful of his cruel
bereavement, he entreats Bazardo to paint a picture of him with his
wife and son, to paint a murderer, “a youth run through and through,”
and—if he only could—“to paint a doleful cry.” At the end of this
scene Hieronimo is at his greatest, and, although in a more detailed
study of the play the manner of his revenge and his death would find
due place, we will be content to leave him here:

    “Make me curse,” +he cries,+ “make me rave, make me cry,
    make me mad, make me well again, make me curse hell, invocate
    heaven, and in the end leave me in a trance—and so forth.

    _Painter._ And is this the end?

    _Hieronimo._ O no, there is no end: the end is death and
    madness! As I am never better than when I am mad; then,
    methinks, I am a brave fellow; then I do wonders; but reason
    abuseth me, and there’s the torment, there’s the hell. At the
    last, sir, bring me to one of the murderers; were he as strong
    as Hector, thus would I tear and drag him up and down.”[65:1]

Hieronimo’s wife, Isabella, who is similarly afflicted by Horatio’s
murder, though she plays a much smaller part in the play, first “runs
lunatic” in a short scene with her maid. Here her talk is mere nonsense:

    “Why did I not give you gowns and goodly things,
     Bought you a whistle and a whipstalk too,
     To be revenged on their villanies?”[65:2]

She seems sane enough, however, in the “Painte Scene,” and only appears
once again,[65:3] when she cuts down the accursèd arbour and, after a
long soliloquy, stabs herself.

The comparatively rough sketches of Greene and Kyd—the first, in
order of time, of those under consideration—have been introduced thus
early into this chapter for the sake of contrast with the figures that
follow.[65:4] Kyd, in “The Spanish Tragedy,” almost certainly inspired
“Titus Andronicus,” and we may be fairly sure of his influence on
“Hamlet.” Now that we have examined the work of the instructor, let us
turn to Shakespeare’s maniacs and see how the pupil has bettered the
instruction.

The most powerful character among the maniacs, by far the grandest
figure in our drama of insanity, if not indeed in the whole of
English drama, is King Lear. “Grandly passive”—the description is
Professor Dowden’s—“played upon by all the manifold forces of nature
and society,” he “passes away from our sight, not in any mood of
resignation or faith or illuminated peace, but in a piteous agony of
yearning for that love which he had found only to lose for ever.”[66:1]
This alone would make him a noteworthy figure, but he has far greater
claims on our admiration and wonder. He is as lovable, even in his
greatest weakness, as the most affectionate of all Shakespeare’s
characters, yet more terrible than his darkest villains. He takes
hold at once of our sympathy, our pity and our imagination, and the
tragic feelings evoked by the drama conflict in us with the more human
emotions roused by his own essential humanity.

At the beginning of the play he is often said to be already insane,
especially by those medical writers who are somewhat inclined to
pervert Shakespeare in order to read in him their own opinions. “The
general belief is that the insanity of Lear originated solely from the
ill-treatment of his daughters, while in truth he was insane before
that, from the beginning of the play, when he gave his kingdom away.”
Thus Dr. Brigham, in the “American Journal of Insanity,” and thus more
than one of his kind. But if what they assert be true, and Lear is
really mad in the first scene of the play, then “King Lear” is not, in
the Shakespearean sense, a tragedy at all. Lear is not mad, however, at
this point, as an examination of the scene will shew. His apparently
arbitrary division of the kingdom has really been planned before the
opening of the play; the protestations of love on the part of his
daughters are only planned as an impressive setting for the bestowal of
the richest portion upon his best-loved child. Nor was it the King’s
original intention to live with each of his daughters in turn: “I loved
her most,” he says of Cordelia, “and thought to set my rest on her kind
nursery.”[67:1] His powers are indeed failing; his childishness, his
vanity, his wayward temper have more sway over him than of old; but
at the very worst his state is but one of incipient senile decay. His
daughters themselves recognise this. “’Tis the infirmity of his age,”
says Regan to Goneril, “such unconstant starts are we like to have from
him as this of Kent’s banishment,” and Goneril adds that they must
“look . . . to receive, not alone the imperfections of long-ingraffed
condition, but therewithal the unruly waywardness that infirm and
choleric years bring with them.”[68:1] Here, then, he stands, impatient
and passionate, “a very foolish, fond old man,” but sane in every sense
of the word. Only a physician could detect in his “unconstant starts”
a predisposition to insanity, with which, since it is not part of the
play, we need not concern ourselves.

When the King next appears, his passion is for a time calmed, and his
state, apart from the short scene with Oswald (i., 4, 84, etc.), one
of tolerant indulgence. The caustic comments of the fool he listens to
and encourages; it is only when Goneril appears that his tone changes
to one of ill-concealed irritation. “How now, daughter! what makes that
frontlet on? Methinks you are too much of late i’ the frown.”[68:2] He
pierces the thin disguise of urbanity which cloaks her speeches, and
attacks with all the fierceness he can summon the ingratitude which it
conceals. It is by no chance that he strikes his head as he exclaims:

                  “O Lear, Lear, Lear.
    Beat at this gate, that let thy folly in,
    And thy dear judgment out.”[68:3]

He invokes the most terrible of curses on his ungrateful daughter.
His words are here and there broken, but their sense is only too
clear. Hot tears escape him in spite of himself; his manhood he feels
to be shaken, and when alone with his Fool and the faithful Kent (now
disguised as “Caius” the servant), he feels that passion and shock have
done their worst. Even as he listens to the jests of the Fool, he knows
that the curse is coming upon him. The “self-consciousness of gathering
madness” breaks through all restraint:

    “O let me not be mad, not mad, sweet heaven!
     Keep me in temper, I would not be mad”[69:1]

From this time onward his self-control grows less and less; try as he
will, he is unable to restrain his passion:

    “O how this mother swells up toward my heart!
     Hysterica passio, down, thou climbing sorrow,
     Thy element’s below!”[69:2]

But the passionate nature is reasserting itself and will not be kept
down. Sarcasm, tenderness, and anger alternate in his speeches; he
responds to the least sign of love, but anything less draws from him
the bitterest reproaches. He prays for patience and for the judgment
of Heaven to be manifested in his favour. Now he begins to approach
incoherence, and the abruptness which marks the matter as well as the
manner of his speech shews only too plainly the affection of his mind.
His state of mind is truly described as one of “high rage.”

                          “No, I’ll not weep;
    I have full cause of weeping; but this heart
    Shall break into a hundred thousand flaws,
    Or e’er I’ll weep.—O fool, I shall go mad.”[70:1]

It is from this point, though the physicians, with Dr Bucknill at
their head, deny it, that we can actually assert that Lear is insane.
Hitherto there have been signs that his madness was imminent, but it is
the scene on the Heath which is “par excellence,” the scene of Lear’s
madness. It is true that, as Dr. Bucknill says, he has “threatened,
cursed, wept, knelt, beaten others, beaten his own head.”[70:2] But
“the addition of a physical cause” marks the crisis of what Shakespeare
certainly means to be understood as insanity in the sense which that
term commonly bears. From this time predominates that symptom which is
so widespread in cases of insanity—the domination of an _idée fixe_.
After Lear has announced “My wits begin to turn”[70:3] (a statement of
itself not without significance), Edgar enters, disguised as Tom o’
Bedlam. Lear mistakes him; the idea dominant in his mind comes to the
surface: “Didst thou give all to thy daughters? And art thou come to
this?”[71:1]

However, the ravings of the King by no means continue incessantly from
this point. Indeed, in the presence of Edgar he becomes comparatively
tranquil, and henceforward periods of storm and calm follow in quick
succession. His speeches still contain much reason, and they have lost
little of their wonderful force. Edgar, appearing unclothed, is to
Lear an enviable object—“the thing itself.” Hence, through another
semi-delusion, he becomes a “learned Theban,” a “philosopher.”[71:2]
This delusion continually recurs, and is developed with much force and
even eloquence, but with less poetry.

In the scene where Lear arraigns a pair of joint-stools as his supposed
daughters,[71:3] we can trace all the wanderings of the deluded mind.
In their “warp’d looks,” the King can read “what store (their) heart
is made on.” He resolves to have them tried for their cruelty. Some
people are standing about him. One (Edgar) is taken for a “robèd man
of justice.” Another (the Fool) is “his yokefellow of equity.” Kent
is “o’ the commission,” and must take his place beside them. Goneril
is arraigned first, and Lear takes his oath that “she kicked the poor
King, her father.” The joint-stool naturally makes no reply; her guilt
is thereby confirmed. “She cannot deny it.” The other sister is then
brought forward. But even as the self-constituted witness is about to
give evidence, the image vanishes from his mind; the delusion changes;
the criminal has escaped:

    “Arms, arms, sword, fire! Corruption in the place!
     False justicer, why hast thou let her ’scape?”

Now Edgar is again the object of a delusion; he is one of those scanty
hundred followers: “You, sir, I entertain for one of my hundred; only
I do not like the fashion of your garments.” It is all so true, and at
the same time so pathetic! Edgar feels that he can hardly sustain his
disguise.

    “My tears,” +he says,+ “begin to take his part so much,
     They mar my counterfeiting.”

A long interval (according to Daniel, four dramatic days) has passed
before Lear again appears.[72:1] He is “fantastically dressed with wild
flowers” and is at first ignorant of Edgar’s presence. Now he is wild,
full of delusions, and certain of nothing. His mind first runs upon
soldiers and war: “There’s your press-money. That fellow handles his
bow like a crow-keeper.”[72:2] Now he recalls a scene with Goneril, now
the terrors of the storm on the heath, now some memory of his former
greatness. “Is’t not the King?” asks Gloster, and the reply of Lear
rings true:

                      “Ay, every inch a king.
    When I do stare, see how the subject quakes.”[73:1]

“Matter and impertinency,” to quote the words of Edgar, mingle in his
speech. He seems no longer to suspect the nature of his disease. He
only knows that he needs surgeons: “I am cut to the brains!” Mr. Cowden
Clarke aptly draws the reader’s attention to this phrase,—expressive
of what acute physical and mental suffering!—together with such
phrases as “I am not ague-proof” and “Pull off my boots, harder,
harder.” It is in this scene, perhaps, more even than in the Storm
Scene of the third act, that we feel the acutest distress at the King’s
sad condition.

We are relieved at length. When next we meet King Lear,[73:2] it is
at Cordelia’s tent in the camp. Gentle hands are ministering to him;
loving faces are near to welcome him, when he shall awaken from the
sleep which it is hoped will be his cure. He awakens to the sound of
“soft music,” growing gradually louder—how different from the “chimes
of Bedlam”!—and when Cordelia speaks to him, he believes her to be a
spirit from Heaven. Then at last he wakes—still infirm of mind, but
faintly conscious of infirmity, not frantic with physical and mental
pain. Everything in this scene is touched with the most delicate
pathos; Lear’s wistful plea:

                    “Do not laugh at me,
    For, as I am a man, I think this lady,
    To be my child Cordelia.”[74:1]

Cordelia’s heart-felt reply:

    “And so I am, I am.”[74:2]

Kent’s loyal assertion that his master is in his “own kingdom,” and the
old father’s final

    “Pray you now, forget and forgive,”[74:3]

as if he were hardly convinced even yet that Cordelia’s end was not
revenge.

With such tender care as might now have been his lot, the old King
would surely have recovered something like his former state of mind.
But this is not to be, and our dramatic selves at least will not wish
that it should be so. When Lear enters, with Cordelia dead in his arms
and the rest following behind, we feel perhaps as nowhere else his
tragic greatness. One wrathful speech, one tender reminiscence, and
another of the fiercest:

                      “Her voice was ever soft,
    Gentle and low, an excellent thing in woman,
    I kill’d the slave that was a-hanging thee.”[74:4]

A few questions and replies, and the catastrophe is upon us. Exquisite
sympathy creates exquisite pathos:

    “And my poor fool is hang’d! No, no, no life!
     Why should a dog, a horse, a rat have life,
     And thou no breath at all? Thou’lt come no more,
     Never, never, never, never, never!—
     Pray you, undo this button; thank you, sir,—
     Do you see this? Look on her—look—her lips—
     Look there, look there!”[75:1]

Lear is dead; he has rejoined his belovèd daughter; he has been
“dismissed with calm of mind, all passion spent.” What greater
consummation could we desire?

There is little need to insist upon the grandeur and pathos of Lear,
and, happily, with our next subject of study, the need is equally
small. Yet Shakespeare’s presentation of Ophelia is utterly different
from his presentation of Lear. The madness of Lear we are able to trace
from its first symptoms; we follow it through all its involutions and
are present at its partial cure. Ophelia we see but once after she
“becomes distract.” A brief word of introduction, and she appears; a
few broken words and snatches of song and she has left us. A brief
re-entry and she has passed us again, and all is over—all save the
report of her death. Lear is an old man, predisposed to insanity by
a passionate temper and a mind weakened by old age. Ophelia is a
young girl, a “Rose of May,” whose loss of reason excites in us not
so much terror as sheer pity. With Lear the crisis is brought on by
thwartings of the will, followed by the severest physical exposure and
shock. With Ophelia the cause is mental shock following the deepest
of sorrows. Lear dies half-sane; Ophelia is never restored to her
right mind,—her death is not shewn to us like that of Lear. There is
a reason for these differences. Ophelia is no tragic personage and
our sympathies are not to remain for long with her misery. She must
disappear, lest she should destroy all our interest in the main plot.
And thus we must not expect to find the depth in her character which we
find in the character of Lear.

Before her affliction wins for her our sympathy, Ophelia stands in our
estimation far below Shakespeare’s other heroines. Perhaps it would
not be too much to say that at times, like Isabella in “Measure for
Measure,” she is actually repellent, and for exactly the opposite
reason. She is passive and reserved, gentle to the point of weakness, a
tool in the hand of any man who could gain her confidence. This is the
reason for her mind giving way. Throughout her life, she has leaned for
support, not on her own strength, but upon the strength of her father
and her brother. Her father is murdered, her lover distracted, her
brother far away—and Ophelia herself is unable to stand alone.

We may have blamed her for a too ready acquiescence in her father’s
prying schemes and despised her for throwing over her lover, but
whatever her sins, they are more than atoned for by the treatment to
which she has to submit at the hands of Hamlet himself; and when, in
addition to this, her father is killed and she loses her reason, we
feel that these calamities have been wholly undeserved. Thus, when
a Gentleman of the Court prepares the Queen for her sad entry, our
sympathy is entirely won:

    “She speaks much of her father; says she hears
     There’s tricks i’ the world, and hems and beats her heart;
     Spurns enviously at straws; speaks things in doubt,
     That carry but half sense.”[77:1]

She is led in, crooning to herself, chattering incoherently of her
sorrows, confusing them in her mind and mingling them together in her
speech. Her songs have been censured for their alleged grossness. Small
wonder if they should contain reminiscences of her lover’s foul talk,
yet for the most part these ditties are mere expressions of piercing
sorrow at his supposed untimely madness. First she is clearly recalling
the scenes where he has disdained her.

    “How should I your true love know
                From another one?”[77:2]

But as the Queen demands the meaning of the song, its theme changes:

    “He is dead and gone, lady,
       He is dead and gone;
     At his head a grass-green turf,
       At his heels a stone.”[77:3]

And then, as the King comes in, she confuses the two calamities, and
sings, as though her lover and not her father were dead:

    “White his shroud as the mountain-snow . .
       Larded with sweet flowers;
     Which bewept to the grave did go,
       With true-love showers.”[78:1]

The King’s voice seems here to divert the broken current of her
thoughts and she wanders again. Then, returning to the tragic
theme with the most piteous of cries: “We must be patient; but I
cannot choose but weep, to think they should lay him i’ the cold
ground,”[78:2] she goes out.

Before long Lærtes returns, furious with rage at his father’s violent
end and eager to be revenged “most throughly” on his enemies. He has
not heard of his sister’s affliction and is dumbfounded, as at this
moment she returns. Then he realises what has taken place and all his
anger melts into a terrible grief:

    “O heat, dry up my brains! tears seven times salt
     Burn out the sense and virtue of mine eye . . .
     O heavens! is’t possible a young maid’s wits
     Should be as mortal as an old man’s life?”[78:3]

Her pitiful condition soon reinforces his determination to be revenged:
“This nothing’s more than matter,”[78:4] he exclaims, and the
spectator re-echoes the cry as he gazes on the enraged brother and the
afflicted girl whose sorrows have been more than she can bear. In her
madness there is not a jot of the maniacal frenzy which is the great
characteristic of Lear. Her nature was ever too gentle:

    “Thought and affliction, passion, hell itself,
     She turns to favour and to prettiness.”[79:1]

Though of a wholly different nature from the insanity of Lear,
Shakespeare’s delineation of Ophelia’s madness is in its way quite as
masterly. We see nothing of it in its earlier stages—indeed it would
seem to have been of sudden birth and to have developed quickly. In
her ravings there is none of that force and pregnancy which marks the
invective of Lear; two fixed ideas dominate her mind and constantly
recur to it; apart from these she is totally incoherent. We are told,
by those who know, that her insanity takes the form of erotomania, “the
fine name for that form of insanity in which the sentiment of love is
prominent;”[79:2] we should suppose, indeed, from what she says, that
her father’s death is its chief cause, as the King and Queen naturally
think also; but this can hardly be assumed, for we cannot say how far
she confuses the two causes of her affliction.

The Queen’s account of the death of Ophelia is in keeping both with
the tone of the “mad scene” and with the nature of Ophelia’s malady.
Exquisitely pathetic, it tells how the distraught girl, obeying a
common instinct of the insane for floral decoration (an instinct which
we also find in “King Lear”) clambered with “fantastic garlands,” on to
a willow which overhung a stream. Mad folk are notoriously regardless
of danger, and Ophelia’s rashness led to a premature grave:

                      “An envious sliver broke;
    When down her weedy trophies and herself
    Fell in the weeping brook. Her clothes spread wide,
    And mermaid-like awhile they bore her up;
    Which time she chanted snatches of old tunes,
    As one incapable of her own distress,
    Or like a creature native and indued
    Unto that element: but long it could not be
    Till that her garments, heavy with their drink,
    Pull’d the poor wretch from her melodious lay
    To muddy death.”[80:1]

It will be seen that Shakespeare’s Ophelia, though not in the technical
sense a tragic character, is essentially a character of tragedy, for
it would be only in the gravest and most pathetic of tragi-comedies
that scenes so magnificently portrayed as those of Ophelia’s madness
and the report of her death could be allowed to appear. And in no case
could we witness with equanimity her restoration to complete sanity.
The character was apparently a popular one on the Elizabethan stage and
in more than one contemporary play there are resemblances to it which
are so marked as to make a conjecture of mere coincidence impossible.
We are now to consider a personage similarly conceived, but treated
with none of the “high seriousness” of Ophelia and in altogether a
lighter vein—and introduced into a comedy. This character (that of
the ‘Gaoler’s Daughter’ in ‘The Two Noble Kinsmen,’ probably the work
of Shakespeare and Fletcher) is certainly one of the imitations of
Ophelia. It is with equal certainty the work of Fletcher—indeed, the
present writer is only prepared to admit Shakespeare’s hand at all in
two or three scenes, and these are entirely concerned with the main
plot, whereas the story of the Gaoler’s Daughter is a side issue,
and she never appears on the stage at the same time as the Two Noble
Kinsmen themselves. The nature of Fletcher’s imitation—we might almost
say his caricature—of Ophelia will best be seen from a brief account
of the various scenes in which the Gaoler’s Daughter appears.

The main plot embodies the well-known story of Palamon and Arcite
and their love for the fair Emilia. It will be remembered that in
Chaucer’s version of the story it was “by helping of a freend” that
Palamon escaped from prison; in our play the friend is none other than
the daughter of the gaoler. She is prompted to do this service by a
hopeless and entirely unrequited love for the unfortunate prisoner,
which helps to drive her to distraction. The exact nature of her malady
is somewhat doubtful, and the author is not concerned to make it clear.
One suspects that he was none too clear on the subject himself. The
Doctor, who, unlike Shakespeare’s physicians, is a rather incompetent
fellow with a very competent tongue, says that her disease is “not an
engraffed madness, but a most thick and profound melancholy.”[82:1]
Various other references, however, suggest mania rather than
melancholy, and as the girl is an obvious imitation of Ophelia, she may
best be considered here.

The whole story of the development of her madness is told in those
portions of the play which form the underplot, and, in its first
stages, it is told with considerable skill. A “Wooer” is asking
the Gaoler for his daughter’s hand, and during the conversation
the daughter herself comes in and the talk runs on the noble
prisoners.[82:2] The daughter is full of their praises. “By my troth,
I think fame but stammers ’em; they stand a grise above the reach of
report.” “The prison itself is proud of ’em; and they have all the
world in their chamber.” Then the two prisoners appear “above” and the
girl at once shews the nature of her interest—much as Portia, in “The
Merchant of Venice” is made to display her preference for Bassanio:

    _Gaoler_:   “Look yonder they are! that’s Arcite looks out.”

    _Daughter_: “No, sir, no; that’s Palamon; Arcite is the
                      lower of the twain; you may perceive a
                      part of him.”

The love which one has probably suspected here is openly revealed
in the fourth scene of the second act, which consists solely of a
soliloquy by the Gaoler’s Daughter. The course of her love is made
plain to us: first she admired him; finally, pity having sprung from
admiration and helpless love from pity, she

    “Extremely lov’d him, infinitely lov’d him.”

Her love has been fed by the plaintive songs he sings and impassioned
by his kindness, his courtesy and a chance caress. On the next
occasion[83:1] we see her more sympathetically yet—her love has
achieved something, Palamon is free, and before long his deliverer is
to meet him with food. But though she wanders by night through the
forest, she is unable to find him. For two days nothing has passed
her lips save a little water, she has not slept, and her whole being
is alive with terror at the “strange howls” which seem to tell of her
hero’s untimely fate. “Dissolve my life!” she cries, with the dire
foreboding of the incipient lunatic,

                            “Let not my sense unsettle,
    Lest I should drown, or stab, or hang myself . . .
                            So, which way now?
    The best way is the next way to a grave:
    Each errant step beside is torment.”

For a moment she disappears, only to re-enter[84:1] in a state
bordering on frenzy. Dawn has broken, and her search has been
unsuccessful:

                              “Palamon!
    Alas no! he’s in heaven—where am I now?
    Yonder’s the sea, and there’s a ship; how’t tumbles!
    And there’s a rock lies watching under water;
    Now, now, it beats upon it; now, now, now,
    There’s a leak sprung, a sound one; how they cry!
    Spoom her before the wind, you’ll lose all else;
    Up with a course or two, and back about, boys;
    Good night, good night; ye’re gone. I’m very hungry:
    Would I could find a fine frog! he would tell me
    News from all parts o’ the world; then would I make
    A careck of a cockle-shell, and sail
    By east and north-east to the King of Pygmies,
    For he tells fortunes rarely.”

She leaves us again, breaking into the first of her mad songs:

    “For I’ll cut my green coat a foot above my knee;
       Hey nonny, nonny, nonny.”

Up to this point the character of the Gaoler’s Daughter is not unworthy
of Shakespeare, but Fletcher could not keep at so high a level for
long. More than any of his contemporaries he creates mad folk for the
purpose of embellishing his comedies; in this play, having developed a
situation with many fine capabilities, he proceeds to rush in and spoil
his own work in the worst possible way. The luckless girl is introduced
into a rustic scene[84:2] and made to sing for the delectation of
some peasants, to exchange coarse banter with them, and even to join
in their morris. From this time forward the underplot is hopelessly
degraded, both by its being drawn out to an absurd length and by its
ending in the coarsest of scenes which leads to what we are asked to
believe is the girl’s complete restoration to sanity.

The Wooer first acquaints the Gaoler with his sweetheart’s
complaint.[85:1] We learn that it has been preceded by the natural
irritation which is common in such cases, and that she has answered her
father’s questions:

                “So childishly,
    So sillily, as if she were a fool,
    An innocent.”

Since we have last seen her, her senses have quite gone. She constantly
repeats phrases which tell of her trouble—“Palamon is gone,” “Palamon,
fair Palamon,” and the like. She even plagiarises Desdemona, and
sings nothing but “Willow, willow, willow.” She has been playing and
garlanding herself with flowers; now she weeps, now smiles, now sings;
reckless of danger, she sits by a lake, and attempts to drown herself
at the Wooer’s approach. She appears at length[85:2] and carries on
the same kind of conversation, fancifully constructing long trains
of imagination from the smallest incidents. While ever and anon the
theme of Palamon recurs: he is still in love with her—“a fine young
gentleman,” and he “lies longing” for her in the wood.

This her father reports to the Doctor: “She is continually in a
harmless distemper, sleeps little; altogether without appetite, save
often drinking; dreaming of another world and a better; and what
broken piece of matter so e’er she’s about the name Palamon lards
it.”[86:1] The Doctor is out of his depth. He understands little of
the mind diseased, holding the popular notion that it is “more at some
time of the moon than at other some,” and confessing that he “cannot
minister” to her “perturbed mind.” The remedy which he proposes is
of the crudest. The Wooer is to dress as if he were Palamon, satisfy
all the girl’s desires, and wait for her to return to her right mind.
Both Wooer and Gaoler protest against the extreme application of this
“cure,” but the Doctor is so insistent that they give in, and when in
the last scene Palamon enquires after the girl who procured his escape
and who, he has heard, has been ill, he is told that she is

                      “well restor’d
    And to be married shortly.”[86:2]

It is unnecessary to dwell on the cure, for long before this stage the
story has lost all semblance of probability.

The inferiority of the Gaoler’s Daughter to Ophelia is as patent as
that of the false to the true Florimel of Spenser’s “Færie Queene.”
A little more skill on the part of the author and a great deal more
restraint would, no doubt, have effected an enormous improvement,
but it is unlikely that Fletcher could ever have made us take the
same interest in the Gaoler’s Daughter as we take in Ophelia. She
is quite unnecessary to the plot, and would require far greater
depth of characterisation before she could appeal with any force to
our sympathies. Had this been done, the taint of the comic and the
coarseness removed, the ravings lessened and the execrable character
of the Doctor changed, we might have had another Ophelia and not an
exaggerated and debased imitation.

Whatever the nature of the madness of our last subject, the affliction
of Penthea, in Ford’s “Broken Heart” is certainly acute melancholia.
She is dealt with here for the sake of contrast with the two preceding
characters. “The Broken Heart,” as far as its “mad-scenes” are
concerned, has certainly more in common with “Hamlet” than with “The
Two Noble Kinsmen.” It is a tragedy of more than usual gloom, and the
scenes in question are marked by a subdued restraint quite absent
from the “Two Noble Kinsmen.” Penthea talks much more coherently than
either Ophelia or her ape; and though there is a distinct want in her
speeches of that colour which so marks the other two plays, she is much
nearer Ophelia in spirit and essentials than the girl for whom Ophelia
actually stood as a model.

The story, so far as it concerns Penthea, is this: She is in love with
Orgilus, son of a counsellor to the King of Laconia, but has been
compelled to marry Bassanes, a jealous nobleman whom she detests. Her
brother Ithocles’ love for the King’s daughter, Calantha, becomes known
to Penthea, who, in spite of her brother’s cruelty to her, tries to
bring about their union; when she is dead, however, her lover stabs
Ithocles and the Princess dies of a broken heart. Penthea’s situation,
when in the second act she has an interview with Orgilus, is this: she
is contracted to Bassanes, and though she loathes him and will have no
more to do with him than she can help she will not consent to break the
bond of marriage. Her loss of reason, which terminates in her death
in the fourth act, is one of the main factors of the series of events
which leads up to the impressive final situation.

The scenes which portray the melancholy and distraction of Penthea are
much superior to the others in which she appears, by reason of the
irresistible sympathy which they inspire. We are not greatly enamoured
of the unhappy girl in the first scenes; her character is somewhat
slightly drawn, and, as one commentator puts it, there is “a trace of
selfishness in her sorrow, which operates against the sympathy excited
by her sufferings.”[89:1] This is dispelled in that touching scene
(iii., 5), where Penthea pleads with Calantha on behalf of her brother.
Her plaintive farewell to life, in the same scene, is not less touching:

                          “Glories
    Of human greatness are but pleasing dreams
    And shadows soon decaying; on the stage
    Of my mortality my youth hath acted
    Some scenes of vanity, drawn out at length
    By varied pleasures sweetened in the mixture,
    But tragical in issue . . .
                      . . . You may see
    How weary I am of a lingering life,
    Who count the best a misery.”

When she next enters “with her hair loose” (iv., 2), Bassanes and
Orgilus are engaged in a violent quarrel. She is followed by Ithocles
heart-broken like Shakespeare’s Lærtes, begging her to look up and
speak to him:

                    “Your Ithocles, your brother,
    Speaks t’ ye; why do you weep? Dear, turn not from me.”

The sight moves all to pity or remorse, save only Orgilus, whose bitter
sarcasm, when rebuked by Ithocles, turns to a dreadful thirst for
revenge. But the afflicted girl recks nothing of this. Loss of sleep
and a voluntary fast have combined with her heavy sorrows to produce
the inevitable result; her depression has deprived her of her reason
and she is sinking into her grave:

                        “There’s not a hair
    Sticks on my head, but, like a leaden plummet,
    It sinks me to my grave: I must creep thither;
    The journey is not long.”

“Her fancies guide her tongue,” but the burden of her talk is the
subject of marriage, child bearing, infidelity, and true love. Her
resolve to die by starvation is certainly the project of a disordered
brain, though Mr. Saintsbury treats it as if it were not, and censures
the character as unnatural![90:1] Assuming that

    “There is no peace left for a ravished wife
     Widowed by lawful marriage,”

she declares that her blood shall

              “be henceforth never heightened
    With taste of sustenance,”

and falls fainting into her attendant’s arms. The subsequent account of
her death[90:2] is the more pathetic by reason of its brevity:

    _Philema._              “She called for music,
    And begged some gentle voice to tune a farewell
    To life and griefs; Christalla touched the lute;
    I wept the funeral song.

    _Christalla._            Which scarce was ended
    But her last breath sealed up these hollow sounds,
    ‘O cruel Ithocles and injured Orgilus’
    So down she drew her veil, so died.”

The presentation of Penthea’s madness is one of the few examples of a
truly artistic treatment of the subject, and “The Broken Heart” is
one of the few post-Shakespearean plays which with some touches by
the Master-hand might have become a really great romantic tragedy.
Penthea is, to tell the truth, about as far inferior to Ophelia as
she is superior to the Gaoler’s Daughter. The partly unsympathetic
presentation of her character in the first part of the play, the lack
of picturesqueness and relief from the gloom of the tragedy, the
suspicion of melodrama in the surrounding scenes and the involved
nature of the plot—all these combine to place Penthea on a lower level
than Ophelia. And, in addition, she is less important and hence less
striking from a purely dramatic point of view.

Something has already been said of the plot and the personages of “The
Lover’s Melancholy,” but the melancholy of Palador and the madness
of Meleander may be briefly considered here as furnishing additional
examples of Ford’s treatment of the subject. Palador’s melancholy,
which gives the title to the piece, seems to be largely temperamental
and scarcely a case for the physician, though Corax, his medical
adviser, goes to some pains to “cure” it, and is in consequence,
hailed as a “perfect arts-man.”[91:1] The Prince’s melancholy is thus
described:

                  “He’s the same melancholy man
    He was at’s father’s death; sometimes speaks sense,
    But seldom mirth; will smile, but seldom laugh;
    Will lead an ear to business, deal in none;
    Gaze upon revels, antic fopperies,
    But is not moved; will sparingly discourse,
    Hear music; but what most he takes delight in
    Are handsome pictures.”[92:1]

His melancholy apparently began at his father’s death and was increased
by the disappearance of Eroclea. We need not stay long over him.
Corax, who is apparently a man of many theories and much resource,
presents the Prince with a Masque,[92:2]—already mentioned—in which
madmen of various sorts pass over the stage and make speeches. The
last of these persons is Palador’s lost love in disguise who appears
as “Love-Melancholy.” How far the Prince’s malady is relieved by this
is uncertain; but the form of “Parthenophil” arouses memories and the
re-appearance of Eroclea in the next act is the real “potent” which
restores the melancholy lover.

The madness of Meleander, Eroclea’s father, is more interesting. He
has, so far as we know, no sort of predisposition to insanity, which
comes upon him following a cloud of troubles—he has been accused of
treason, his lands have been seized and his daughter has disappeared.
We are informed by our physician that his affliction is not madness; it
is

                              “His sorrows—
    Close-griping grief and anguish of the soul—
    That torture him.”[93:1]

Yet we can find in Meleander all those “signs” which by now we are
beginning to associate with insanity. The unfortunate man “sleeps
like a hare, with his eyes open,” he groans, “thunders” and “roars,”
and his “eyes roll.” He talks wildly, yet at times coherently, knows
his daughter Cleophila, enquires “Am I stark mad?” His maniacal
excitability displays itself in his laughter, “the usher to a violent
extremity.”[93:2] The reaction soon follows; he faces those about him
and remarks:

    “I am a weak old man; all these are come
     To jeer my ripe calamities.”[93:2]

At times—and this is surely the greatest praise we can give him—his
ravings remind us of Lear’s, with their mingled sarcasm, pathos and
unconcealed rage. His brother’s son Menaphon approaches him with a
“Good uncle!” What, outside Shakespeare, can be more like Lear before
his eloquence goes and leaves his rage supreme, than Meleander’s
furious reply:[93:3]

                      “Fools, desperate fools!
    You’re cheated, grossly cheated; range, range on,
    And roll about the world to gather moss,
    The moss of honour, gay reports, gay clothes,
    Gay wives, huge empty buildings, whose proud roofs
    Shall with their pinnacles even reach the stars,
    Ye work and work like moles, blind in the paths
    That are bored through the crannies of the earth,
    To charge your hungry souls with such full surfeits
    As being gorged once, make ye lean with plenty;
    And when ye’ve skimmed the vomit of your riots,
    Ye’re fat in no felicity but folly;
    Then your last sleeps seize on ye; then the troops
    Of worms crawl round and feast; good cheer, rich fare,
    Dainty, delicious!”

How does Corax propose to cure such a patient as this? Spurred on
by the flatteries of Rhetias—“a reduced Courtier”—nothing daunted
by the picturesque report that Meleander “chafes hugely, fumes like
a stew-pot,”[94:1] he coolly explains his intention of out-Heroding
Herod—“We will roar with him, if he roar,”[94:1]—and suiting the
action to the word he “produces a frightful mask and headpiece.”[94:1]
Meleander enters, armed with a poleaxe and raving in a vein which must
have delighted the greediest of the groundlings. A battle of words
and mock actions ensues, and the madman is soon reduced to a state
of comparative calm. He lays down the poleaxe, and Corax removes the
mask. The physician then proceeds to minister to the mind diseased with
tales of his own supposed mental sufferings, assuming apparently that
like counteracts like in madness as in melancholy. This is to some
extent true, and Shakespeare rightly represents Lear as in a state
of comparative tranquillity when in the presence of Edgar. But Ford’s
play would seem to be inspired rather by a desire to please than by
a fidelity to real life. The concluding scene,[95:1] however, so far
as it concerns Meleander, is sufficient compensation, for again it
recalls “King Lear” in its general nature if not in matters of detail.
The madman has been put to sleep, his hair and beard have been trimmed
and his gown is changed. Music, as in “King Lear,” is playing, and a
song, full of delicate charm, is being sung by a Boy outside. At its
close Meleander awakens, confused and half-dreaming. He is inclined to
sleep again, but the physician hails him—somewhat boisterously, one
would think—and in spite of his patient’s brusque “Away, beast! let me
alone,” he succeeds in rousing him. The madness certainly appears to
have left him; he is now quite calm, though the burden of his troubles
still oppresses him.

          “The weight of my disease,” +he says,+
    “Sits on my heart so heavy,
    That all the hands of art cannot remove
    One grain, to ease my grief.”

Corax has, indeed, in preparation, a cordial which is to effect this,
but it is reserved—not wholly for dramatic reasons,—to a fitting
climax. Successive messengers first bring the news that the Prince,
now happy (though the father knows it not) in the possession of his
love, has restored to Meleander all the honours he formerly enjoyed,
together with new honours and marks of favour undreamed of. Then at
last Eroclea is presented to him and his restored reason stands the
test of happiness. Explanations ensue; all part friends; and “sorrows
are changed to bride-songs.”

It will be seen that Ford’s conception of madness is by no means a
low one; he has not debased it by making it a sport for those to whom
it is a thing to fleer and jest at; he has introduced it into comedy
indeed, but it must be remembered that Ford’s tragi-comedy is a wholly
different thing from the gross buffooneries of Fletcher, Dekker and
Middleton, and that the madness of Meleander, though resembling that
of Lear, is on a far lower scale. It rises now and then to unusual
heights, but remains at their exalted level for so short a time that we
never look at it seriously for long. The gloom is also lightened by the
antics of the whimsical Corax, whose triumphs of psycho-medical skill
would, no doubt, in happier times, have induced him to set up a private
Bedlam of his own!

In considering Chettles’ “Tragedy of Hoffman”[96:1] we are met by an
initial difficulty of authorship, for the resemblance between this
play and “Hamlet,” as well as between Lucibella and Ophelia, would
suggest plagiarism. The question, however, is difficult to decide,
and can hardly be discussed here. Whatever be the solution, Lucibella
is a most effective character. To a certain degree her madness is
merely conventional. But there are numerous touches of real art in
her portrayal, and she is not degraded like the Gaoler’s Daughter in
“The Two Noble Kinsmen” by being made “a motley to the view.” On the
contrary, as one editor points out, Chettle surpasses Shakespeare by
making her, unlike Ophelia, directly instrumental in bringing about the
dénouement of the play.

The madness of Lucibella is brought about by the murder of her lover,
Lodowick, through the agency of Hoffman. In her mad wanderings she
discovers the skeletons of Hoffman’s father, and of Prince Otho, for
whose death her lover’s murderer is also responsible. Eventually the
mischief caused by the first shock is undone by a second; Lucibella
recovers her reason. Hear her in her first ravings:

    “Oh [Oh] a sword, I pray you, kill me not,
     For I am going to the river’s side,
     To fetch white lilies and blue daffodils,
     To stick in Lod’wick’s bosom, where it bled,
     And in mine own . . . .
     ‘_We must run all away, yet all must die_’
     ’Tis so;—I wrought it in a sampler.
     ’Twas heart in hand, and true love’s knots and words,
     All true stitch, by my troth, the posy thus—
     ‘_No flight, dear love, but death shall sever us_.’
     Neither did that! He lies here, does he not?”

She cannot make up her mind whether her lover is really dead or not.
Only conscious of a vague calamity, she cries:

    “Tell Lod’wick, Lucibell would speak with him!
     I’ve news from heav’n for him, he must not die;
     I’ve robb’d Prometheus of his moving fire:—
     Open the door!—I must come in, and will;
     I’ll beat myself to air, but I’ll come in!”

So saying, she knocks violently at the door of the vault; those who
surround her fear that she will “do violence upon herself.” She
understands:

    “Oh, never fear me! there is somewhat cries
     Within me, ‘No!’ tells me there’re knaves abroad;
     Bids me be quiet, lay me down, and sleep.”[98:1]

Her violence is noteworthy; three or four men attempt to hold her; but
she succeeds in freeing herself from them, and wanders abroad.

When we next see her the second shock is at work and Lucibella is
returning to sanity. Mathias, Lodowick’s brother, still fears for her
life, having seen her “clamb’ring upon the steepness of the rock,” but
what she has seen in Hoffman’s cave has saved her mental life. She
talks still with the fierce sarcasm of mania.

Shewing the skeletons, she cries:

                                “Is it not like
    I keep a princely house, when I have such
    Fat porters at my gate.”

Still, as before, she lards her speech with scraps of song:

      “Here, look here!
    Here is a way goes down!
      Down, down, down,
    Hey down, down!”

This ditty is reminiscent of the descent to the cave, but the next
moment the memory of that is gone and only the consciousness of her
loss remains:

    “I sang that song while Lod’wick slept with me:”

But at length, gradually and before our eyes, she recovers her lost
reason. Her speech to the Duchess of Luneberg shews what seems to be
the wandering of her still distraught mind. She displays the rich
clothes of Otho:

    “A poor maiden, mistress, has a suit to you,
     And ’tis a good suit, very good apparel.”

And she breaks into song again. But shortly afterwards she recognises
the two corpses, and as Lorick unfolds the ghastly story of Hoffman’s
crime the princess comes to her right mind again. At the end of the
scene she declares her complete sanity:

    “Nay I will come; my wits are mine agen,
     Now faith grows firm to punish faithless men.”[99:1]

For a moment now we may look at the madness of Cardenes, which enters
into the plot of Massinger’s “A Very Woman.” He is son to the Duke
of Messina and a rival of Don John Antonio, the Prince of Tarent, for
the hand of Almira, daughter of the Viceroy of Sicily. In a violent
quarrel with Antonio, who is enraged at not being the favoured suitor,
Cardenes is wounded—it is at first thought mortally, but he recovers,
though for a time he loses his senses. Eventually he is restored by a
physician named Paulo. We see very little of him in his mad condition.
First we learn that his disease is

                             “Melancholy
     And at the height, too, near akin to madness . . .
            . . . His senses are distracted,” +says Paulo,+
    “Not one, but all; and if I can collect them
     With all the various ways invention
     Or industry e’er practised, I shall write it
     My masterpiece.”[100:1]

When Cardenes actually appears,[100:2] any maniacal excitement which
may have disturbed him has disappeared, and he appears to be in a state
of simple melancholia:

    “Farewell, farewell, for ever, name of mistress!
     Out of my heart I cross thee; love and women
     Out of my thoughts.”

This is the burden of his discourse. Paulo encourages him by mild
half-contradictions:

    “And yet I’ve heard of many virtuous women.”

But Cardenes’ new-learned philosophy remains unchanged:

    “Not many, doctor; there your reading fails you:
     Would there were more, and in their loves less dangers.”

The treatment recommended for this “strange melancholy” by the
physician, who is of good reputation and has received many gifts from
the Duke of Messina and others, is most noteworthy. He is no friend
of prevailing customs: The patient “must take air.” Though, as the
surgeons protest, “he hath lost already . . . much blood,”

    “To choke up his spirits in a dark room,
     Is far more dangerous.”

The remainder of the cure is not unlike the prescription of Corax. The
physician applies himself to all the patient’s “humours,” “checking the
bad and cherishing the good.”

                      “For these I have
    Prepared my instruments, fitting his chamber
    With trapdoors, and descents; sometimes presenting
    Good spirits of the air, bad of the earth,
    To pull down or advance his fair intentions.
    He’s of a noble nature, yet sometimes
    Thinks that which, by confederacy, I do,
    Is by some skill in magic.”[101:1]

Who can wonder, for “Protean Paulo” with his quaint devices shews a
truly super-human versatility. At all events, he succeeds in gathering
the “scatter’d sense” of Cardenes, who thanks him profusely for having
been

    “My friar, soldier (and) philosopher,
     My poet, architect, physician.”

Paulo is indeed a disinterested and enthusiastic doctor, and is really
more interesting than Cardenes himself.

The madness of Sir Giles Overreach is worth our notice, as being
introduced merely as a stage device, to emphasise the defeat of the
cruel extortioner and to serve as a climax to the comedy. The last
act of the play, into which he is introduced, shows every sign at
the outset of being the usual type of “last act” of a tragi-comedy.
Overreach, with “distracted looks,” has learned how he has been tricked
both by his creature, Marall, and by his daughter Margaret, who,
against his will, has married her lover, and now appears with him,
as his wife. The usurer is overcome by the double shock. “My brain
turns,” he cries. His rage passes all bounds. He attempts to kill his
daughter and threatens to make the house “a heap of ashes.” Flourishing
his sword, he raves of his courage; those standing around are, to his
disordered mind,

                                “hangmen,
    That come to bind my hands, and then to drag me
    Before the judgment seat: now they are new shapes,
    And do appear like Furies, with steel whips
    To scourge my ulcerous soul. Shall I then fall
    Ingloriously and yield? No! spite of Fate,
    I will be forced to hell like to myself.
    Though you were legions of accursed spirits,
    Thus would I fly among you.”[102:1]

He flings himself on the ground, foaming and biting the earth, only to
be disarmed, bound and carried “to some dark room.” He will be tended
by physicians from Bedlam, who will try

    “What art can do for his recovery.”[103:1]

The climax could hardly be more effective, were it not for Lord Lovell,
who, before winding up the business of the play, thinks it necessary
to point the moral in the most objectionable manner, only surpassed by
Massinger himself elsewhere:

    “Here is a precedent to teach wicked men,
     That when they leave religion, and turn atheists,
     Their own abilities leave them.”[103:2]

With Overreach may be compared Webster’s Ferdinand, who, after causing
his sister, the Duchess of Malfi, with her little children, to be
murdered, is driven by remorse to self-questionings and fears, and
thence to raving madness. Webster’s presentation of insanity is far
superior, in these scenes, to that by Massinger just cited. For the
ravings of Ferdinand come upon us with the greatest force after the
awful tragedy for which he has been responsible—we are spared the
comments of Justice Greedy on the situation. Further, the madness of
Ferdinand is what we should expect from one of so passionate a nature,
and its course, as will now be seen, is depicted with realistic force
to its terrible end.

His insanity takes the form, so we are told, of lycanthropia,[103:3]
victims of which, we learn imagine themselves transformed into
wolves and do deeds of violence to dead bodies; the Duke has already
been found at night, has “howled fearfully” and seems in danger of
his life. When he enters, he is persecuted by a fear of his shadow,
which he tries unreasoningly to kill. The Doctor approaches him, but
can do nothing with his patient beyond extracting one expression of
fear: “Hide me from him; physicians are like kings, they brook no
contradiction.” But the timidity lasts but a moment, and Ferdinand
leaves the stage in a fit of insane passion.

When he reappears, it is but for a moment; his words are few but tense,
and recall the terrible crime he has committed. “Strangling is a very
quiet death . . . So, it must be done in the dark: the Cardinal would
not for a thousand pounds the doctor should see it.” In the next scene,
he is more violent. Interrupting a struggle between Bosola, his bloody
instrument, and his brother the crafty Cardinal, he wounds them both,
in spite of the latter’s cry for assistance, and is himself stabbed by
Bosola, who stigmatises him as “thou main cause of my undoing.” In his
last moments he recovers something of his reason.

    “He seems to come to himself,” +says Bosola,+
    “Now he’s so near the bottom.”

And in truth the last words which fall from the Duke’s lips reiterate
the remorse which he feels for his crime.

As concluding examples of the presentation of the madman, in the most
usual sense of the word, may be taken two of Fletcher’s characters and
one of Jonson’s. Fletcher’s productions shall be considered briefly in
succession: they are “The Passionate Madman,” in the play, with that
sub-title, usually known as “The Nice Valour,”[105:1] and Shattillion
in “The Noble Gentleman.”

“The Passionate Madman,” who has no name besides, is inspired, like
many of his fellows, rather by a desire to please the public than
by a passion for probability. His peculiar mania takes the form of
a succession of “fits,” characterised as the “love fit,” the “merry
fit,” the “angry fit” and so on. There is seldom any reason adduced
for the change from one state to another, which is probably governed
by the dramatic situation. There seems to be no authority for the
classification of insanity in so many compartments in this manner;
if the author ever thought about this at all, he probably arrived at
a generalisation of the most common attribute of mania—the violent
and rapid succession of emotions—in much the same way as Jonson
generalised traits of character into “humours.”

The madman of this play is a kinsman to the Duke of Genoa. He makes
his appearance at the end of the first act,[106:1] coming on with a
wooden smile and making “a congee or two to nothing.” He selects a
courtier for the object of his affections, makes love to him as if to
a lady, and as the object of his choice is quite willing to sustain
the delusion, he works himself up to a great state of excitement. In
the next scene[106:2] it appears “by his flattering and his fineness”
that “he is still in his love-fit,” and his mistress, thinking it well
to humour him, disguises herself as Cupid and persuades him that if he
comes away she will make all ladies follow him. She really hopes to
cure him:

    “She keeps this shape. . . .
     To see if she can draw all his wild passions
     To one point only, and that’s love, the main point.”[106:3]

She has every opportunity of trying, for at this moment the “love
fit” obligingly gives way to the “angry fit.” Galoshio, the clown,
has been “almost beaten blind” by the Passionate Madman, “twice
thrown down stairs, just before supper,” and “pluck’d and tugg’d by
th’ hair o’ th’ head about a gallery half an acre long.”[106:4] The
Passionate Lord, after giving this foretaste of his achievements, is
not long in appearing, “rudely and carelessly apparelled, unbraced
and untrussed,”[107:1] and followed by the Lady, still in disguise.
The fit would seem at first to be one of melancholy, which rejects all
the Lady’s blandishments and stigmatises those of her sex as “fair
mischiefs.” As Lapet, Galoshio’s master, approaches, the “furious fit”
succeeds. Lapet is struck down and discreetly shams death, while the
madman accompanies his truncheon-blows with wild snatches of song.
We see no more of our madman after this until the fifth act when the
“merry fit” has sway. The burden of his speech is “Ha! ha! ha!” and his
songs are wildly merry: he begins to be “song-ripe.”[107:2] The Lady
once more appears, followed by several others dressed as fools. But a
cure is unexpectedly wrought more quickly than she could accomplish it.
“The Soldier” (brother to Chamont, the chief character of the play) has
been insulted by the madman at an earlier stage in it, and, much to
the dismay of the Lady and her attendants, he now stabs the Passionate
Lord, and makes his escape. He only re-appears at the end of the
play, cured of his wound and at the same time of his madness. La Nove
explains this to the Duke:

    “Death cannot be more free from passions, sir,
     Than he is at this instant; he’s so meek now,
     He makes those seem passionate were never thought of;
     And, for he fears his moods have oft disturbed you, sir,
     He’s only hasty now for his forgiveness.”[108:1]

There is little to add to this sketch, which is sufficiently
expressive. The Lord is not interesting, still less striking, as a
character; no attempt is made to introduce a vestige of reality into
the madness, and thus the comedy leaves us unmoved. We cannot even be
indignant at it—it is so feeble.

Is it necessary to complete the story by adding that the Passionate
Lord marries the Lady?

As a slightly different example of Fletcher’s work, we may consider his
“Noble Gentleman” and the madman Shattillion. We can diagnose his case
more readily than that of the Passionate Lord. He suffers from a kind
of persecutory delusion, being

              “strong opinion’d that the wench he lov’d
    Remains close prisoner by the King’s command,
    Fearing her title.”[108:2]

At the same time, he believes that certain enemies have designs on his
life. Meeting his cousin Cleremont, he enquires of him his “faction,”
and being told:

    “I know no parties nor no factions, sir,”

he commands him:

                    “Then wear this cross of white,
    And where you see the like, they are my friends;
    Observe them well, the type is dangerous.”[109:1]

A touch of the pathetic (often mingled with the comic), accompanies the
“poor, grieved gentlewoman” who once refused his suit and for love of
whom Shattillion’s mind became unhinged, who:

    “Follows him much lamenting, and much loving,
     In hope to make him well.”[109:2]

But, says Longueville, a courtier,

                “he knows her not,
    Nor any else that comes to visit him.”[109:2]

Shattillion is plainly created for a dramatic purpose. The main story
concerns the gulling of a gentleman named Mount-Marine by his wife,
who persuades him that the King has granted him many high honours, and
that he is Duke of Burgundy. Shattillion, whose delusions persuade him
that he has himself a claim to the crown, is worked into the plot with
considerable skill, and his quarrel in the fifth act with the “Duke”
and his servant unites the two plots with great effect.

A short study of the “mad scenes” will shew the strength and the
weakness of this character. The particular form of his mania is brought
out very clearly. The madman is perfectly sure about the plots laid
for him; his friends are really enemies disguised to “sift into” his
words; _he_ “can see and can beware”; _he_ has his wits about him and
thanks Heaven for it! The burst of laughter with which the audience
would greet this assertion is at once hushed as the Lady laments the
o’erthrow of her lover’s noble mind;

    “That was the fairest hope the French court bred,
     The worthiest and the sweetest-temper’d spirit,
     The truest, and the valiantest, the best of judgment.”[110:1]

She is remorse-stricken at being the cause of it all, and prays Heaven
to be merciful; she will do all she can to restore her lover to his
senses.

A long interval elapses before Shattillion is again introduced.[110:2]
Now he has heard of the “new duke” and he is suspicious and curious,
so much so that he is gesticulating and enquiring about it in the
open street. The Lady appears and begs Madam Marine to take him into
her house “from the broad eyes of people.” She does so. Shattillion,
now believing that he is “betray’d” and about to be beheaded, is led
away giving his last instructions. Before long, we see him once more,
this time in Marine’s house, proving to Marine that he (Shattillion)
is of the blood royal, and but for the interference of his friends he
would seize Marine as a traitor. In the next act he persuades Jacques,
Marine’s old servant, that he too is in danger of his life, and drags
him into his house for shelter. As they go in, the Lady appears, and,
knocking at Shattillion’s door, is repulsed as another enemy. The
madman’s imagination goes so far as to see “some twenty musketeers in
ambush,” and he suspects his love of being their captain. Meanwhile
Jacques, disguised as a woman, is leaving the house, when his preserver
stops him, accuses him of being

                      “A yeoman of the guard,
    Disguised in woman’s clothes, to work on me,
    To make love to me and to trap my words
    And so ensnare my life.”[111:1]

Jacques at length escapes, and after another adventure returns as
servant to the “Duke.” In this capacity he is forced into a fierce
quarrel with Shattillion, who, in his furious loyalty, seizes Marine
and throws him to the ground. Hereupon the Lady has a remedy to propose:

    “A strange conceit hath wrought this malady;
     Conceits again must bring him to himself;
     My strict denial to his will wrought this,
     And if you could but draw his wilder thoughts
     To know me, he would, sure, recover sense.”

Longueville undertakes the charge. Assuring Shattillion that the King
has rewarded his loyalty, he presents to him the Lady, who, he says,
has been released from prison for his sake. Shattillion is overcome,
and after a few minutes falls asleep. Longueville knows that this is a
good sign:

    “His eyes grow very heavy. Not a word,
     That his weak senses may come sweetly home.”[111:2]

He wakes, indeed, still “weak and sickly,” but himself again.

The general impression left by this comedy is, on the whole, pleasant,
that part of it concerned with Shattillion included. The antics of
the madman himself are certainly comic, especially on the stage, and
the lighter side of his mania is persistently put forward. The only
pathetic touch is, in fact, the genuine sorrow of his Lady. This
predominance of the comic may be regretted, though in a play of the
farcical nature of “The Noble Gentleman” little else could be expected.
However, the sound, realistic basis of the disease, together with
the simple and unassuming cure—which, nevertheless, would hardly be
successful in real life,—makes the treatment of Shattillion as far
superior to the treatment of the Passionate Lord as the one play is to
the other. Considered absolutely, the representation of Shattillion
is chiefly remarkable for its reality, its skilful weaving into the
plot, and its mingling of pathos with broad humour. On the other hand
the pathos would not be so artificial if the entrance of the lady were
somewhat less mechanical—we could almost certainly predict when she
will enter in the last two acts. Fletcher’s almost total blindness to
everything but the comic and its possibilities also detracts from the
effect of Shattillion, and the very obvious dramatic motive for his
introduction does not, on reflection, improve matters.

We have now passed from the heights of tragedy, through its pathos, and
the ill-blended pathos and broad humour of inferior tragi-comedy to the
pure and simple inanity of “The Nice Valour”—a work which certainly
appears to be unfinished. In considering Shattillion, we have risen
as high as we can hope to do within the limits of comedy, and before
leaving the raving lunatic for another class of madman we must descend
slightly as we consider Ben Jonson’s comedy of “Bartholomew Fair,” and
his madman, Trouble-all.

The plot has already been outlined, and it will be seen that the place
of the madman is an important one. Theoretically, he is of prime
importance to the play, since it is foretold that Dame Purecraft, who
has already had two suitors, shall “never have happy hour unless she
marry within this sen’night; and when it is it must be a madman,” and
it is Quarlous, dressed in Trouble-all’s clothes and affecting his
malady, who eventually marries her. As a matter of fact, the main
portion of the play is concerned with other things, and we only meet
our madman in the fourth act. From this point onward, the author shews
great ingenuity in his handling of him; the burden of his remarks
alone serves as a _point d’appui_ for the spectator (who by this time
is probably getting wearied), while the humorous situations which he
provokes, culminating in the acuteness of Quarlous and its success, are
largely responsible for the undoubted popularity of the comedy with
both reader and spectator.

This is, of course, very much to the credit of a comedy which
professedly deals with low life; it is more to our purpose to
remark that as a picture of madness the character of Trouble-all is
exceptionally correct. Gifford’s note to Cunningham’s edition of Ben
Jonson remarks that “Even the trifling part of Trouble-all, in any
other writer than Jonson, would be thought deserving of praise for
its correct delineation of a particular species of insanity, too
inoffensive for fear and too slight for commiseration.”[114:1] Gifford
is right, both in what he states and in what he implies. We expect
correctness from Jonson and we are not disappointed.

A sketch of the madman should make this clear. He was “an officer
in the court of pie-poudres last year and put out of his place by
Justice Overdo.”[114:2] His affliction is marked by the _idée fixe_;
he raves continually about the Justice, and will do nothing—not even
the simplest actions of daily life—without satisfying himself that he
has Overdo’s warrant for it. How true to life this feature is may be
read in any modern book on insanity. He appears first of all in the
fair, where Overdo is being put into the stocks: “If you have Justice
Overdo’s warrant,” he says, “’tis well; you are safe: that is the
warrant of warrants.”[115:1] He is walking to and fro, with all the
restless impatience of mania, demanding to be shewn Adam Overdo. In
his frantic wanderings he comes upon Dame Purecraft, who apparently
thinks him more suitable for her than any madman she has yet seen
and cries: “Now heaven increase his madness and bless and thank it.”
Trouble-all’s reply does not vary: “Have you a warrant? an you have a
warrant, shew it.”[115:1] Person after person presents himself but the
madman’s reply is always the same. Every conversation he interrupts
with his query, and, when he is ignored, he turns away in disgust. Once
he exasperates a watchman, who strikes him. The latent rage of the
lunatic shews itself, but the madman’s rationalisation first provides
it with an excuse: “Strikest thou without a warrant? take thou that.”
When Quarlous personates the lunatic[115:2] our author rightly depicts
him as only partially successful, though his end is nevertheless as
well reached as if he had been wholly so. He raves occasionally about
a warrant, but it is not hard to see his sanity peeping through the
veil of assumed madness. Much of his talk is comparatively coherent,
and beyond his occasional references to the warrant he makes no attempt
to play the madman. To turn his literal phrase into metaphor, he is
“mad but from the gown outward.”[116:1] Trouble-all himself, when
Quarlous’ purpose is accomplished, makes one furious entry, armed “with
a dripping pan,”[116:1] but he does no mischief, and soon disappears.

Trouble-all is a noteworthy character, though a small one; yet,
for more than one reason, the character is less praiseworthy than
Fletcher’s Shattillion. Considerable care is shewn in the sketch, but
little or no sympathy; and, if madness is to be utilised in comedy, the
comic element should at least, as has been seen, be mingled with some
touches of pathos. As it is, any other character than the madman would
have served Jonson equally well, provided that it had supplied him with
the same dramatic advantages. When Overdo says: “Alas, poor wretch!
how it yearns my heart for him!” we believe him about as readily as if
Jonson had made the same remark in an “author’s footnote.”

In one respect, and in one respect only, can any claim be made
on behalf of Jonson’s character to rank above Fletcher’s “Noble
Gentleman.” Fletcher makes us look at madness from the point of view
of the madman, and tries to put us in sympathy with him. We have
seen that he is only partially successful. Jonson, on the other hand,
treats madness in quite an objective way, uses it frankly for a
subsidiary dramatic purpose, and portrays his madman with the utmost
conscientiousness and care. It may be just a question—though the
writer himself does not think so—whether from the point of view of art
Jonson’s production is not the more praiseworthy.

Be that, however, as it may, it is nevertheless absolute Ben Jonson!


FOOTNOTES:

[61:1] From the Alleyn MS.

[62:1] “Spanish Tragedy.”

[63:1] “Spanish Tragedy,” iii., 12a.

[64:1] “Spanish Tragedy,” iii., 12.

[65:1] Ibid., iii., 12a.

[65:2] Ibid., iii., 8.

[65:3] Ibid., iv., 2.

[65:4] Other examples of conventional madness abound. See page 151,
Note 1. (Ann Ratcliff, in “The Witch of Edmonton.”) Peele, in the “Old
Wives’ Tale,” presents us with a character, Venelia, sent mad by a
sorcerer, Sacrapant:

    She “runs madding, all enraged, about the woods
    All by his cursèd and enchanting spells.”

But, apart from this, she does nothing!

[66:1] “Shakespeare, His Mind and Art,” p. 272.

[67:1] “King Lear,” i., 1, 125-6.

[68:1] “King Lear,” i., 1, 296, etc.

[68:2] Ibid., i., 4, 207-8.

[68:3] Ibid., i., 4, 292-4.

[69:1] “King Lear,” i., 5, 50-1.

[69:2] Ibid., ii., 4, 56-8.

[70:1] “King Lear,” ii., 4, 285-9.

[70:2] “The Mad Folk of Shakespeare,” p. 194.

[70:3] “King Lear,” iii., 2, 67.

[71:1] “King Lear,” iii., 4, 49-50.

[71:2] Ibid., iii., 4 passim.

[71:3] Ibid., iii., 6.

[72:1] “King Lear,” iv., 6, 81, etc.

[72:2] l. 85.

[73:1] ll. 109-10.

[73:2] “King Lear,” iv., 7.

[74:1] “King Lear,” iv., 7, 68-9.

[74:2] l. 70.

[74:3] l. 84.

[74:4] Ibid., v., 3, 272-4.

[75:1] “King Lear,” v., 3, 305, etc.

[77:1] “Hamlet,” iv., 5, 4, etc.

[77:2] Ibid., iv., 5, 23, etc.

[77:3] ll. 29-32.

[78:1] “Hamlet,” iv., 5, 35, etc.

[78:2] ll. 68-70.

[78:3] Ibid., iv., 5, 155, etc.

[78:4] l. 173.

[79:1] ll. 188-9.

[79:2] Ferriar, quoted by Dr. Bucknill, p. 155 (op. cit.)

[80:1] “Hamlet,” iv., 7, 167, etc.

[82:1] “Two Noble Kinsmen,” iv., 3.

[82:2] Ibid., ii., 1.

[83:1] Ibid., iii., 2.

[84:1] Ibid., iii., 4.

[84:2] Ibid., iii., 5.

[85:1] Ibid., iv., 1.

[85:2] Ibid., iv., 1, 104, etc.

[86:1] Ibid., iv., 3.

[86:2] Ibid., v., 2.

[89:1] Ward, Eng. Dram. Lit., ii., 300. The original criticism, as Dr.
Ward points out, is Gifford’s. Cf. the latter’s edition of Ford, vol.
i., p. 337.

[90:1] “Elizabethan Literature,” p. 408.

[90:2] “The Broken Heart,” iv., 4.

[91:1] “The Lover’s Melancholy,” iii., 3.

[92:1] Ibid., i., 1.

[92:2] A similar device is found in Brome’s play, “The Antipodes,”
where, however, the physician uses the fantastic but less morbid device
of a “play within a play.” See page 136.

[93:1] Ibid., iv., 2.

[93:2] Ibid., ii., 2.

[93:3] Ibid., ii., 2.

[94:1] Ibid., iv., 2.

[95:1] Ibid., v., 1.

[96:1] Acted in 1602; first printed in 1631.

[98:1] “Hoffman,” iv., 1.

[99:1] Ibid., v., 2.

[100:1] “A Very Woman,” ii., 2.

[100:2] Ibid., iii., 3.

[101:1] Ibid., iv., 2.

[102:1] “A New Way to Pay Old Debts,” v., 1.

[103:1] Ibid., v., 1.

[103:2] Ibid., v., 1.

[103:3] “The Duchess of Malfi,” v., 2.

[105:1] It is referred to, however, in the following pages as “The
Passionate Madman.”

[106:1] “The Passionate Madman,” i., 1.

[106:2] Ibid., ii., 1.

[106:3] Ibid., iii., 1.

[106:4] Ibid., iii., 2.

[107:1] Compare “Hamlet,” ii., 1, 77, etc.

    _Ophelia_: “My lord, as I was sewing in my closet,
                Lord Hamlet, with his doublet all unbrac’d,
                No hat upon his head . . he comes before me.”

[107:2] “The Passionate Madman,” v., 1.

[108:1] Ibid., v., 3.

[108:2] “The Noble Gentleman,” i., 2.

[109:1] Ibid., i., 3.

[109:2] Ibid., i., 2.

[110:1] Ibid., i., 3.

[110:2] Act iii., Sc. 2.

[111:1] Ibid., iv., 3.

[111:2] Ibid., v., 1.

[114:1] p. 210.

[114:2] “Bartholomew Fair,” iv., 1.

[115:1] Ibid., iv., 1.

[115:2] Ibid., v., 2.

[116:1] Ibid., v., 3.




CHAPTER V.

MAD FOLK IN COMEDY AND TRAGEDY.

(ii.) IMBECILITY.

    “I ask’d her questions and she answered me
     So far from what she was, so childishly,
     So sillily, as if she were a fool,
     An innocent.”

                                            (“_Two Noble Kinsmen._”)


Of the few sketches of imbeciles which we find in the drama under
consideration there is hardly one which can properly be called a
full-length portrait. As a class, the idiots come in for a fair
share of attention; the “fool” as well as the “madman” is shewn us
in the asylums of Fletcher and Middleton, but no dramatist seems to
have thought the tragic or the comic possibilities of the “lunatic
lean-witted fool” sufficiently promising to justify the inclusion
of him as a prominent character of a play. This is not altogether
surprising; the imbecile—we shall take the term as nearly as possible
in its precise signification[118:1]—was not considered as an ordinary
madman; he was treated like the half-developed creature he really was,
looked after more carefully than the madman, and trained in simple
things just like a child. So the fool occupied a subordinate place, in
drama as well as in life.

The word “fool” as has been explained,[119:1] is used in our plays
in more senses than one, and a few characters who answer to the
description “simple,” “idiot” or “imbecile” may now be mentioned. They
demand little space, for, though serving a dramatic purpose, they have
little interest or importance in themselves. Nearest sanity is Pogio of
Chapman’s “Gentleman Usher,” whose half-witted condition seems to be
largely pose; it is a strange way of carrying out his own dictum that
“gentility must be fantastical.” Bergetto, too, in Ford’s play, “’Tis
pity she’s a Whore,” though consistently spoken of as “fool’s head,”
“dunce” and the like, could hardly be called anything more serious
than a foolish fellow. Jerome, in Chettle’s “Tragedy of Hoffman,” and
Cloten, the “empty purse” of Cymbeline, have both something of the
true congenital idiot about them. With Jerome, however, our judgment
is influenced more by impression than by anything he says or does in
the play. Hoffman and others call him an “idiot,” and he himself owns
“They say I am a fool,” after which he speaks of seeking out “my notes
of Machiavell.” But this is mere foolish talk, as, indeed, are most
of his speeches. In a quaint scene he addresses the people as their
King, but is outdone by a later speech of Hoffman’s, which he himself
solicits saying, “I charge you all, upon pain of death, that you hear
my cousin.” The action of a fool, indeed, but was it not also the
action of honest Brutus? Therefore we must cling to our estimate of
Jerome, framed from his own speeches, as justification for including
him in this category. Both the actions and the words of Shakespeare’s
Cloten are those of a man mentally deficient; Guiderius was not far
from the truth when he said:

                                “not Hercules
    Could have knock’d out his brains, for he had none”;[120:1]

and everyone who knows him wonders

    “That such a crafty devil as is his mother
     Should yield the world this ass.”[120:2]

A quaint pair of simples may be seen in Lyly’s “Mother Bombie.”
Memphio, an avaricious old man, has a supposed son, Accius by name,
whom he wishes to marry to Silena; both parties being mentally
defective, the old man takes it for granted that their offspring will
be sane. Silena is described as “no natural fool”; and though this
would at first seem to be untrue, it becomes doubtful later if the
author had any very clear idea of the nature of her malady. She begins
by being “passing amiable, but very simple,” but before long her
condition approaches mania. Her first speech is typical: “My name is
Silena. I care not who know it, so I do not; my father keeps me close,
so he does; and now I have stolen out, so I have; to go to old Bombie
to know my fortune, so I will.” Candius, who listens to her, thinks
her at first a “fool,” but decides that as “so fair a face cannot be
the scabbard of a foolish mind,” she must be mad. In her meeting with
Accius, in the fourth act of the farce, she justifies this conclusion
by mistaking him for a “joint-stool.”[121:1]

Before leaving the imbeciles, we must make a bare mention of
Shakespeare’s Caliban—bare, because we are hardly justified in calling
him a human being at all. The son of a witch,

    “A freckled whelp hag-born—not honour’d with
     A human shape,”[121:2]

he is only distinguished, as Coleridge says, from the brutes by his dim
understanding (bereft, however, of moral reason) and the absence in him
of all the instincts of absolute animals. Schlegel gives perhaps the
best account of Shakespeare’s creation when he says: “It is as though
the use of reason and human speech should be communicated to a stupid
ape.”[121:3] Such a being as this can certainly not be classed with
such “simples” and “fools” as have just been mentioned.

To the ordinary reader of drama the word “fool” describes, not a
natural imbecile, but a peculiar type of character in the tragedy and
comedy of Shakespeare. The Shakespearean fool has a significance which
it would be out of place to dwell upon here; he is, however, speaking
generally, perfectly sane, and rather rich than defective in intellect.
Thus he has nothing in common with the “naturall fooles . . . suted in
long coats” mentioned by Nash,[122:1] and but little with the “fool”
of many a country village. For this strange character is most often a
half-demented fellow with a gift for making curt, cutting remarks, and
a tongue which, since its owner fears nobody, invariably vents whatever
his breast may forge. There would seem to be only one of Shakespeare’s
fools who is really half-witted, and that one is, of course, the fool
in “King Lear.”

This point is well made by Dr. Bradley: “To suppose that the Fool is,
like many a domestic fool at that time, a perfectly sane man pretending
to be half-witted, is surely a most prosaic blunder. There is no
difficulty in imagining that, being slightly touched in the brain,
and holding the office of fool, he performs the duties of his office
intentionally as well as involuntarily—it is evident that he does
so. But unless we suppose that he _is_ touched in the brain, we lose
half the effect of his appearance in the Storm-scenes. The effect of
those scenes (to state the matter as plainly as possible) depends
largely on the presence of three characters and on the affinities and
contrasts between them; on our perception that the differences of
station in King, Fool, and beggar-noble, are levelled by one blast of
calamity; but also on our perception of the differences between these
three in one respect,—viz., in regard to the peculiar affliction of
insanity. . . . The insanity of the King differs from that of the
beggar, not only in its nature, but also in the fact that one is real
and the other simply a pretence. Are we to suppose then that the
insanity of the third character, the Fool, is in this respect a mere
repetition of the second, the beggar,—that it is _mere_ pretence?
To suppose this is not only to impoverish miserably the impression
made by the trio as a whole, it is also to diminish the heroic and
pathetic effect of the character of the Fool.”[123:1] If further proof
were needed it could be found in the expressions and the turns of
thought which characterise him throughout the play,—they are not the
expressions of mania, nor yet of perfect self-possession; they are
often, indeed, the expressions which one would expect of a feeble mind.
Can one suppose,—to take only one example—that any sane man, even in
the position of a Court fool, would insist, as mercilessly as the Fool
does in the first scenes, upon the ingratitude of Lear’s daughters?
None of Shakespeare’s other fools will be found to probe a wound so
deep, but it is exactly what one would expect from a Fool whose brain
is really slightly touched. It is true that he also diverts the King’s
attention from his troubles in the same scenes, but it is only to
return to them again with an even more piercing sting.

Still further, if we assume the actual imbecility of the Fool, a flood
of light is at once thrown upon the question of his age—not that it
matters in the least what his age is, but some critics have found a
difficulty in reconciling the references which seem to make him now
a boy, now a man. He is, in fact, a man, but his feeble intellect,
together perhaps with a certain physical frailty, causes him to be
treated occasionally as a boy, much in the same way that Antonio
is treated by Lollio in the “Changeling.” We need not stay longer,
however, to defend this view, for, as Dr. Bradley says: “Arguments
against the idea that the Fool is wholly sane are either needless or
futile; for in the end they are appeals to the perception that this
idea almost destroys the poetry of the character.”[125:1]

Alone, then, in this division of our subject, we place the Fool of
“King Lear.” Demented persons may occur here and there in our plays
(such is Cassandra in “Troilus and Cressida”) and there may even be
some congenital imbeciles (as Cloten in “Cymbeline”). But such cases
of dementia are hard to distinguish from those of mania. In both
cases—especially in the second—it is often hard to say whether or
no the author intended the idea of idiocy to be conveyed. So Lear’s
Fool remains unrivalled and we are glad of it. For nowhere in drama is
there a more delicate intermingling of laughter and tears, of terror
and pathos, than in this play of “King Lear.” The Fool needs no more
lengthy description. To see him (whether as we watch or as we read)
alone suffices, and nothing else will do so. When we have looked on
him, we have seen “sunshine and rain at once”; there is no “better way.”


FOOTNOTES:

[118:1] Strictly speaking, the insanity of the imbecile is congenital;
the general conformation of his brain is faulty, and the mental
phenomena of his condition are for the most part “dissociated from
active bodily disease.” (See Encyl. Brit., s.v. Insanity.)

[119:1] Above, p. 37 ff.

[120:1] “Cymbeline,” iv., 2, 114.

[120:2] Ibid., iv., 1, 57.

[121:1] Cf. “Lear,” iii., 6, 54. The expression was proverbial, it is
true.

[121:2] “Tempest,” i., 2.

[121:3] It is interesting to compare the higher conception of Caliban
seen in Browning’s “Caliban upon Setebos,” where, though the brute
sprawls “with elbows wide, fists clenched to prop his chin,” in the
“cool slush,” he nevertheless reasons vaguely upon such problems as the
existence of evil, of pain, and of a law governing the universe.

[122:1] In “Have with you to Saffron Walden.” The “fool’s coat” is
often mentioned in our plays.

[123:1] “Shakespearean Tragedy,” pp. 311-12.

[125:1] “Shakespearean Tragedy,” p. 312.




CHAPTER VI.

MAD FOLK IN COMEDY AND TRAGEDY.

(iii.) MELANCHOLY.

    “Many new and old writers have spoken confusedly of it,
    confounding melancholy and madness.”

                              (_Burton: “Anatomy of Melancholy.”_)


The representation of “melancholy” and of the disease which we know
as “melancholia” was extremely common in seventeenth century drama.
Its popularity with playwrights of all kinds can be traced to several
causes. In the first place it gave ample opportunity for introducing
poetry of no mean order, which seems to have been more popular on the
stage a few centuries ago than it is to-day. Then “melancholy” was
commonly associated with unrequited love, and the sad lover has always
been a favourite character both in comedy and in tragedy. Again, a
hero or heroine afflicted with “melancholy” was, after all, in the
seventeenth-century acceptation of the term, quite sane. “Melancholy,”
then, became a kind of “humour”—as in the eyes of the mediæval
physician it literally had been—and it was not regarded in at all the
same way as other species of mental disorder.

We must distinguish, however, between the variety of ways in which
the word “melancholy” is used in these dramas, where there are
“large volumes of it in print to very slender purpose.”[127:1] When
Shakespeare says in “Cymbeline”

                        “O melancholy!
    Who ever yet could find thy bottom? find
    The ooze, to show what coast thy sluggish crare
    Might easiliest harbour in,”[127:2]

he is expressing feelings shared by anyone who tries to fathom the
treatment of melancholy by Shakespeare’s own contemporaries. There was
no common and generally recognised conception of melancholy as of the
more obvious forms of insanity. Hence it becomes impossible to consider
the question of melancholy from the standpoint of medicine, still less
to make any division such as the threefold medical division of to-day,
into acute melancholia, excited melancholia, and that alternation of
depression and excitement known as “folie circulaire.” We shall instead
divide our subject more broadly and simply into Melancholy True and
Melancholy False, taking but a few typical cases to illustrate each of
these divisions in turn.

By Melancholy True is meant what we call nowadays “melancholia,”—that
is, a mental disease in which the prevailing symptom is depression,—a
mental disease from the author’s point of view and not merely from
ours. Some cases which would come under this heading have already, for
convenience’ sake, been treated above. There is the melancholia of
Penthea, hardly distinguishable from madness, and utilised dramatically
in a similar way. There is also the melancholy of Palador, which seems
to us less a case for the physician than it did to the author. Ford’s
conception of melancholy as a disease is clearly influenced by Burton,
and he would no doubt have agreed with the doctors of Christopher Sly
that “Melancholy is the Nurse of frenzy,”[128:1] if, indeed, he would
not have gone farther and declined to distinguish between them. Other
cases of melancholia are merely described, and will hardly repay study.
Such is Viola’s well-known description of one (imaginary) girl who

                            “Never told her love,
    But let concealment, like a worm i’ the bud
    Feed on her damask cheek: she pined in thought
    And with a green and yellow melancholy
    She sat like Patience on a monument,
    Smiling at grief.”[128:2]

Shakespeare’s King John is thinking of another kind of melancholy when
he says to Hubert:

                  “. . . that surly spirit, melancholy,
    Had baked thy blood and made it heavy-thick.”[128:3]

In the two characters which we shall now study,—Aspatia of the “Maid’s
Tragedy” and Euphrasia in “Philaster”—we shall see that there is
with Beaumont and Fletcher a considerable lightening of the subject,
with a consequent artistic gain, but possibly a loss in force and
impressiveness.

Aspatia is, of course, throughout the play, subordinated to Evadne,
and she appears only in the first two acts and the last, her death
occurring in the last scene. From her first appearance, after her
betrothed husband has taken Evadne to wife at the King’s command, the
pitiableness of her situation and the nobility and the purity of her
character endear her to us unchangeably. None of the indecency which
mars the play clings to the wronged Aspatia; many would go so far as to
consider her laments more effective, because less revolting, than those
of Ophelia. Wherever we see her

    “Nothing but sad thoughts in her breast do dwell.”[129:1]

When Melantius offers her his ill-timed congratulations on the marriage
which he supposes to have been hers, her reply is short:

                    “My hard fortunes
    Deserve not scorn; for I was never proud
    When they were good.”[129:2]

In the next scene, however, when the presence of the bride makes the
hurt keener, her tongue is loosened. No sweeter song, in spite of the
rather vulgar criticism of Evadne, can be found outside Shakespeare
than the only one Aspatia gives us:

    “Lay a garland on my hearse,
         Of the dismal yew,
     Maidens, willow trenches bear;
         Say I died true;
     My love was false, but I was firm
         From my hour of birth.
     Upon my buried body lie
         Lightly, gentle earth.”[130:1]

“Fie on’t madam!” says Evadne, “The words are so strange, they are able
to make one dream of hobgoblins.”

The effect of Aspatia’s appearances enhances enormously the effect of
the play as a whole.

    “She carries with her an infectious grief,
     That strikes all her beholders.”[130:2]

Her father is distressed beyond measure; her betrothed, “servile ‘iure
divino’ royalist” as he is, is stricken with the keenest remorse. Even
the apparently buoyant Evadne is moved to pity.

Perhaps, in the scene between Aspatia and her waiting women, the
wronged woman loses a little of our sympathy. The dramatists have
evidently succumbed to the Muse of Poetry and Aspatia’s laments become
drawn-out and a little monotonous. Yet the poetry is at times almost
perfect; it is only her continual harping on the subject of “Man, Oh
that beast man!”[130:3] which makes us fear lest melancholy become
raving madness. When she subsides at last into “dull silence,” our
love for her is at its height: she is indeed “like Sorrow’s monument.”

In the last act she appears once more,[131:1] in the disguise of a
supposed brother, with the seeming intention of killing her faithless
lord. A tragic Viola indeed, she succeeds in getting wounded, and
eventually dies, not without witnessing the death of Evadne and holding
Amintor’s hand in token of reconciliation.

The girl Euphrasia, in “Philaster,” has less of tragedy and more of
romance, more even of Shakespeare’s own poetry. In her disguise as
Bellario, Philaster’s page, she appears as a “pretty, sad-talking
boy,”[131:2] and it would seem to be rather the prince, who sits
“cross-armed,” “sighs away the day” for love of Arethusa, and talks
furthermore in several places of going mad,[131:3] who should come
under this category of melancholiacs. But he himself proves to his own
satisfaction that he is sane enough; and though such a statement is not
always to be believed, it seems for once to correspond with the point
of view of the author. But Euphrasia herself is continually reminding
us of her melancholy, which has all the appearance of being conceived
as similar to that of Aspatia, although it is less pronounced. It
springs from love, it is nowhere put down to a mere caprice, and
although in neither of these two plays is any cure attempted, this is
because the characters are subordinated to others and for the sake of a
unified plot.

The melancholy of Mistress Constance, in Brome’s “Northern Lass,” was
probably meant by the author to be taken more seriously than most
people would find possible to-day. In conception it resembles the
melancholy-madness of Fletcher’s “Passionate Madman.” Its cause, to go
no further, is the same. Love has “overwhelmed her spirits, and turned
the faculties of all her senses into a rude confusion, sending forth
the uses of them extravagantly.” The method of her cure, according
to Pate (disguised as a Doctor) is as simple as are the lightning
cures of Fletcher: “The party that she loves must be the doctor, the
medicine and the cure.” This _médecin malgré lui_, however, finds his
patient too much for him. “I fear she is wiser than all of us, that
have to do with her. She knows my gown better than I do; for I have had
but two hours’ acquaintance with it.” Constance, though at times she
sings snatches of song, does not rave like Shattillion or the Gaoler’s
Daughter; the prevailing symptom of her melancholy is depression. As
a character she is peculiarly lacking in charm, though the title-page
of the play, which declares it to be “a comedy often acted with good
applause,” in high places, would suggest that the heroine was popular
enough at the time.

Almira, the daughter of the Viceroy of Sicily, in Massinger’s “A Very
Woman,” might profitably be considered in a later section dealing with
unclassified abnormal states of mind. However, the malady produced in
her by the supposed loss of her lover was apparently conceived by the
dramatist as “melancholy-madness,” and therefore it finds a place here.
Gifford, in a note in his edition of Massinger, describes Almira’s
complaint as “not madness, but light-headedness.” She is firmly
convinced that Cardenes, who has been wounded in a scuffle with his
rival, is dead, and all her friends’ attempts to convince her to the
contrary merely strengthen her belief.

                                “I know you,
    And that in this you flatter me; he’s dead,
    As much as could die of him: but look yonder!
    Amongst a million of glorious lights
    That deck the heavenly canopy, I have
    Discern’d his soul, transform’d into a star.
    Do you not see it?”[133:1]

The belief induces semi-hallucinations. She hears “a dismal sound”—it
is Antonio in hell, “on the infernal rack where murderers are
tormented.”[133:1] This sets a train of delusive ideas in motion;
her cousin fears “she’ll grow into a frenzy,” when one of her women
exclaims “Her fit begins to leave her,” and she is once more herself,
relating her “strangest waking dream of hell and heaven.”[134:1]
Notwithstanding these temperate intervals her father is alarmed, and
fears, not without reason, that

    “She’ll do some violent act upon herself.”[134:2]

Her hands are therefore to be bound and a physician sent for. We hear
a good deal more of her melancholy during the play, but it becomes
conventional, and after the second act we think of her as quite a
rational human being—as a “Very Woman.” It is the strange change in
her affections which gives the great interest to her character which it
certainly possesses; for that reason it would hardly be fair to attempt
to compare her either with Aspatia or with Euphrasia, interest in whom
is dependent on other considerations.

A case of melancholy, both interesting and amusing, similar in
conception and treatment to the mania of Shattillion and of the
Passionate Lover mentioned above,[134:3] is furnished by Brome’s
“Antipodes.” As we should expect in an “approved Comedy” acted in
the year 1638, the subject is approached only from its lighter
side; within the limits which such a treatment necessarily imposes
the play is pleasant enough, and the principal characters are very
laughable. Joyless and Diana, it appears, have a son Peregrine, a
lad of twenty-five, who has been married for some years to a girl
named Martha. But Peregrine, whose inclination has always been for a
roving life, has developed a melancholy in consequence of his parents’
opposition to his desire for travel. The disease, when the play
opens, is “inclining still to worse, As he grows more in days,” and
the father’s anxiety is aggravated by the fact that Martha is also
afflicted with a similar trouble, caused by her husband’s neglect. Her
symptoms are somewhat different:

    “Indeed she’s full of passion, which she utters
     By the effects, as diversely, as several
     Objects reflect upon her wand’ring fancy,
     Sometimes in extreme weepings, and anon
     In vehement laughter; now in sullen silence,
     And presently in loudest exclamations.”[135:1]

Doctor Hughball, a physician of renown, undertakes both cases, and
in addition that of Joyless, whom “some few yellow spots” about the
temples proclaim to be “jealous-mad.” This doctor, like others of the
“cure-all” tribe whom we have recently encountered, has had great
experience of mental disease. He has cured

    “A country gentleman, that fell mad
     For spending of his land before he sold it.”[135:2]

A lady who fell mad with “tedious and painful study” to find “a way
to love her husband,” and “horn-mad citizens, he cures them by the
dozens”![136:1] Brought face to face with the melancholiac in one
of his “fits,” Hughball sets about humouring him, “applauding” his
“noble disposition,” and “adoring” his “spirit of travel.” He tells his
patient that he has been all over the world, even in the Antipodes,
meeting his praise of Mandeville, Drake, and other worthies with vivid
and imaginative descriptions of the unknown lands on the other side of
the world. Everything, it appears, goes by contraries:

                                “There the deer
    Pursue the hounds, and (which you may think strange),
    I ha’ seen one sheep worry a dozen foxes,
    By moonshine, in a morning before day,
    They hunt, trail scents with oxen and plough with dogs.”[136:2]

Peregrine is subdued; he could listen to the Doctor “a whole
fortnight,” and gladly accepts his offer to travel with him to this
wonderful land. Hence, in the next scene, by the device of a play
within a play,[136:3] the Doctor is able to effect a threefold cure.
Joyless’ jealousy is overcome; Martha (after being disguised as a Queen
and formally presented to her husband), wins back the love of the
melancholy Peregrine; and Peregrine himself, though falling back more
than once during the play-scenes to “Mandeville-madness,” is eventually
cured. In the concluding scenes, where music “upon the Recorders” is
being played, we are shewn the melancholiac’s return to complete sanity.

    “I am what you are pleased to make me; but withal . . . ignorant
    of my own condition, whether I sleep or wake, or talk, or
    dream; whether _I_ be, or be not; or if I am, whether I do, or
    do not anything.”[137:1]

Revelations and recognitions follow, in spite of the Doctor’s warning
against “troubling his brain with new discoveries.” Peregrine is then
made to “recover roundly” by means of a short masque (preceded by “a
most untunable flourish”!) introducing “Discord, Folly, Jealousy,
Melancholy, and Madness.” When these characters have been routed by
Harmony and her train, Peregrine declares “Indeed, I find me well.”

The treatment of melancholy in this play is in no way serious, and
shews us little of real value.

“Melancholy False”[137:2] is hard to define; the criterion must
ultimately be a subjective one. It is depicted as a state of the mind
in which the person concerned has full control of himself,—as a cloak
which he assumes for his own purposes, and which he is able to throw
off should necessity arise. At its very worst, it would only be spoken
of to-day as “depression.” Sometimes, it is true, this melancholy seems
to give a definite colour to the person whom it characterises—to
be, in fact, part of his temperament; but in these cases no mention
is made of any possible cure of the trouble—sometimes not even of
the cause—so that the suggestion of disease does not arise in the
spectator’s mind. No doubt such a condition, if persisted in, would
often have disastrous results. Such a “humour” was dangerous, but it
was nevertheless a “humour.”

It may be objected that many persons, using these tests, might well
put Euphrasia and Aspatia in the present category. It is true. But
if we made no distinctions and adopted no classifications but those
which were indisputable and self-evident, we should make very few,
and those would be of little value. We have it on excellent authority
that the only way to “part sadness and melancholy” is “by a familiar
demonstration of the working.”[138:1] To a layman it would probably
be clear that the melancholy of Aspatia and Euphrasia, of Mistress
Constance and Almira, is meant to be of a different kind from that of
several characters with whom we shall now have to deal.

The largest variety of “cases” is furnished by Shakespeare, and for
this reason our study of this type may be confined to his works. Some
of the “cases” are described by Dr. Bucknill:[139:1] “the melancholy
of pride in Achilles, of prosperity in Antonio, of constitution and
timidity in the Queen of ‘Richard II,’ of contemplation in Jacques.”
We might possibly add more, but here are instances enough (if they are
really instances) to shew the nature of this melancholy.

Surprise might perhaps be expressed that Shakespeare should make such
large use of this “humour”; it would be expected that he, whom we
have shewn to be familiar with all kinds of insanity, would conceive
of melancholia more nearly after the fashion of the present-day
physician. The explanation is simple. Shakespeare knew perfectly well
that melancholy could be a disease, and has described it as such. Let
us remember the quotations, given above,[139:2] from “Twelfth Night”
and “King John.” And who was it that “besieged with sable-coloured
melancholy . . . did commend the black-oppressing humour to the most
wholesome physic of thy health-giving air?”[140:1] Yet Shakespeare
was equally well acquainted with that hypochondriacal melancholia and
that temperamental depression which play a large part in modern life,
and both of these, to say nothing of the love-melancholy which varies
from slight depression to acute mania, he found it convenient to use.
The contemporary dramatists, however great or small their knowledge,
usually preferred the “love melancholy” and used it almost exclusively.

The melancholy of Achilles is quite superficial. He is “lion sick of
a proud heart”[140:2] just as Ajax is “melancholy without cause,” and
nobody in the play interprets his behaviour otherwise. The estimate
just quoted of him is one of the least violent of the opinions of Ajax;
Agamemnon calls him “over-proud and under-honest”;[140:3] Ulysses says
that he is

                “possess’d . . . with greatness
    And speaks not to himself but with a pride
    That quarrels at self-breath.”[140:4]

Ulysses’ descriptions of the general’s occupations, of his jests at
Agamemnon and the Greeks, of his delight in Patroclus’ imitations,
and the “loud applause” which comes from his “deep chest”[140:5] are
sufficient proof that his malady is not very serious. Certainly,
judging from the care with which Shakespeare demonstrates the nature
of its source, we shall conclude that this melancholy is presented to
us as a “humour.”

The “Merchant of Venice” is coloured by the sadness of its hero, even
at the height of his prosperity. At the outset of the play he declares
to his friends:

    “In sooth, I know not why I am so sad;
     It wearies me; you say it wearies you;
     But how I caught it, found it, or came by it,
     What stuff ’tis made of, whereof it is born,
     I am to learn.
     And such a want-wit sadness makes of me
     That I have much ado to know myself.”[141:1]

We at least are not at a loss to explain Antonio’s depression. It is
not alone the boredom of “unruffled prosperity”[141:2]—this sorts ill
with the character of the noble merchant: it is rather a peculiarity
of temperament which colours both adversity and prosperity. For such
melancholy as marks Antonio’s farewell to Bassanio:

    “I am a tainted wether of the flock,
     Meetest for death,”[141:3]

is not the necessary concomitant either of prosperity or of adversity.
The two speeches quoted are examples of the same condition of mind;
the melancholy which they exhibit has the double dramatic purpose of
beautifying the character of Antonio and of giving the spectator that
“preadjustment” which is so valuable an aid to the plot.

Similarly we have in “Richard II” the melancholy of the Queen, which
prepares us for the troubles about to befall her. This melancholy may
best be attributed, not necessarily, as Dr. Bucknill suggests, to her
temperament, certainly not to any prosperity she may have enjoyed, but
rather to a vague fear as to the results of her husband’s perilous
journey, coupled possibly with her experience of the King’s rashness
and a recognition of his recent weakness in dealing with Mowbray and
Bolingbroke. It is, at all events, merely a passing sadness of the
“inward soul” and her “heavy sad”-ness is soon dispersed, changing
first to real grief, which gives place before her weaker husband—true
woman that she is!—to a resolution concealing for a time her sorrow.

In Jacques we have a character of more complexity. His humour he
describes as “a melancholy of mine own, compounded of many simples,
extracted from many objects, and indeed the sundry contemplation of
my travels in which my often rumination wraps me in a most humorous
sadness.”[142:1] He wishes, in his own words, to

    “Cleanse the foul body of the infected world,
     If they will patiently receive my medicine.”[142:2]

But the Duke, usually so gentle, is quite out of sympathy with the
pseudo-reformer. Jacques, he says, has been a libertine, and like
many a reformed sinner, the ex-voluptuary would merely “disgorge into
the general world,” “all the embossèd sores and headed evils” of his
unregenerate days.[143:1]

So much discussion has been lavished on the “case” of Jacques that
we shall not attempt to do more than shew what we believe to be its
perfectly superficial nature. Judging from the play as a whole, and
more especially from the Duke’s contempt and Rosalind’s banter, we
should suppose this to be Shakespeare’s view. As Dr. Moulton very
justly remarks, egotism is plainly shewn to be at the root of his
disposition. He has lived out his life in a short time; now he turns
everything, for sheer self-love, into matter not for jests but for
scurrilous abuse, or at best for a malevolent, sarcastic humour.

Yet the morbidity of Jacques’ melancholy suggests that, more than any
other of Shakespeare’s similarly conceived characters, he carries about
with him a secret malady when he persists in his attitude towards
the world. One day the secret wound will fester; his “weeping” and
his “sullen fits” will become uncontrollable; his frantic abuse will
turn to frenzy; his ironic, half-humorous sallies will change to
the disconnected utterances of a maniac; or his surly humour will
sink lower and lower until it reaches the dead level of melancholic
depression.

Here, then, we have, in briefest outline, some of the types of
melancholy—true and false—presented by Shakespeare and certain of his
contemporaries. Numerous examples from other authors of the time might
be added, but we have seen enough to be clear on two points. These are,
the essential difference between the true and the false melancholy, and
the use of each to the dramatist in his work, both for its own sake
and because of the opportunities which it gives for the introduction
of poetical passages. From the character who entertains a “wilful
stillness”

    “With purpose to be dress’d in an opinion
     Of wisdom, gravity, profound conceit,”[144:1]

to the true victim of his sorrow, holding, against his will (like
Constance in “King John”)

                      “The eternal spirit . . .
    In the vile prison of afflicted breath,”[144:2]

the melancholiac has great dramatic possibilities, of which, for the
most part, the fullest advantage is taken.

This seems to be the most convenient place to discuss the question
of the real (as distinguished from the assumed) mental condition of
Hamlet. That it is an abnormal condition most careful readers of the
play will not question. How otherwise can we explain his habitual
inaction, his sudden fits of energy, his violence to those whom he
loves, his strange self-questionings, and his even stranger apathy to
those things which should most move him? The whole question of the
cause of Hamlet’s procrastination depends on our estimate of his mental
state. Goethe’s description of Hamlet as “a beautiful, pure, noble,
and most moral nature, without the strength of nerve which makes the
hero,” is clearly at variance with facts, and the estimates of both
Coleridge and Dowden largely ignore the practical side of the character
of Hamlet. Only by recognising what the play certainly tells us, that
the melancholy of Hamlet is really a disease, can we obtain anything
like a reasonable explanation of his strange movements. After all, he
is not the one-sided, unequally-developed weakling that certain school
editions of Shakespeare would have us suppose. He is, without any
doubt, a man of practical ability, capable of prompt, energetic action,
skilled in all manly exercises. Intellectually, his “noble mind”
compels the greatest regard, he has studied long at the University and
possesses besides such qualities as would serve him admirably as ruler
of Denmark. Fortinbras says of him that

                            “He was likely
    Had he been put on, to have proved most royally.”[146:1]

His moral nature is equally praiseworthy. Ordinarily strong of will,
“most generous and free from all contriving,”[146:2] though probably at
times inclined to be passionate and on occasions headstrong to excess,
he was certainly not the man to procrastinate through “losing himself
in labyrinths of thought” as Schlegel asserts him to have done.

If we would find the key to this mystery, Hamlet himself will give it
us in his first soliloquy. He meditates suicide, from which he is only
kept by the fact that “the Everlasting” has “fix’d His canon ’gainst
self-slaughter.”[146:3] Then he explains why everything to him is
“weary, stale, flat and unprofitable”—it is the terrible shock of his
mother’s incestuous marriage following that of the death of his father,
and the suspicious circumstances which attended it, that has given
rise to this abnormal state of mind. His melancholy is augmented by
the nature of the command laid on him by the Ghost and the consequent
secrecy which he must put upon himself:

    “But break, my heart, for I must hold my tongue.”[146:4]

This is Melancholy True—a state of mind which cannot be thrown
off like a cloak, yet which is abnormal. It is an excellent case
for the pathologist. Truly conceived, it furnishes the only
satisfying explanation of the strange phases of Hamlet’s so-called
“character”—the depression, the self-weariness, the irritability,
the violence, the satisfaction at the smallest thing achieved, the
impossibility of carrying out the original purpose—all these things
are the natural outcome of melancholia.

A two-fold objection to this view has to be met. It will be said that
such a conception of Hamlet destroys the moral lesson of the play. And
would that it did! It is unfortunate that certain critics are unable
to pick up a play without looking at once for the moral. Those who
have done this with “Hamlet” have succeeded in shifting the centre of
gravity from the author to themselves. They say that the play shews how
wrong it is to procrastinate, and how by procrastination we lose far
more than we gain. It is, according to these critics, a mere sermon
preached on the text

                  “That we would do
    We should do when we would.”[147:1]

How, they say, can this sermon be preached if the chief
illustration—the man by whom we are all to be warned—is exculpated
from blame by illness?

They know little of tragedy—or at least of Shakespeare’s tragedy—who
hold a view like this. What Shakespeare habitually does is to shew us
a man, by nature fitted to be a hero of tragedy, with a fatal defect,
the consequences of which are worked out in the play. Looked at from
this point of view, the sentimental objection at once vanishes, and the
second objection arises. It is a more serious one: Can a man suffering
from melancholia—to put the thing in its most prosaic form—any more
than a man suffering from any other form of insanity, be admitted as
a tragic hero? The answer is that he can. And this partly because his
exact state of mind is not determined, partly because it is a condition
not generally recognised as one of disease, and tragedy has always
to be considered from the point of view, not of the doctor, but of
the author and the audience. As Dr. Bradley, who very ably sums up
the question, says in his Lectures on Shakespearean Tragedy: “The man
who suffers as Hamlet suffers—and thousands go about their business
suffering thus in greater or less degree—is considered irresponsible
neither by other people nor by himself: he is only too keenly conscious
of his responsibility. . . . . Hamlet’s state is not one which a healthy
mind is unable sufficiently to imagine. It is probably not further from
average experience, nor more difficult to realise, than the great
tragic passions of Othello, Antony or Macbeth.”[149:1]

Before we leave Hamlet, it should be emphasised that the state of mind
of the hero is quite a subordinate question in the play itself. “It
would be absurdly unjust to call ‘Hamlet’ a study of melancholy, but
it contains such a study,” is Dr. Bradley’s way of putting it.[149:2]
The significance of this is that we must not expect the indications of
Hamlet’s disease to be developed to any degree, nor refuse to claim for
it a place among our examples of “Melancholy True,” just because the
author fails to introduce the hero to a physician![149:3]


FOOTNOTES:

[127:1] As Pate says in Brome’s “Northern Lass” (v., 1).

[127:2] “Cymbeline,” iv., 2, 203.

[128:1] Induction, ii., 135.

[128:2] “Twelfth Night,” ii., 4, 113, etc.

[128:3] “King John,” iii., 3, 42.

[129:1] “The Maid’s Tragedy,” ii., 1.

[129:2] Ibid., i., 1.

[130:1] Ibid., ii., 1.

[130:2] Ibid., i., 1.

[130:3] Ibid., ii., 2.

[131:1] Ibid., v., 4.

[131:2] “Philaster,” ii., 3.

[131:3] _e.g._ iii., 1, 277; iii., 2, 83, etc.

[133:1] “A Very Woman,” ii., 3.

[134:1] Ibid., ii., 3.

[134:2] Ibid., ii., 3.

[134:3] pp. 105 ff.

[135:1] “The Antipodes,” i., 2.

[135:2] Ibid., i., 1.

[136:1] Ibid., i., 1.

[136:2] Ibid., i., 6.

[136:3] The scenes in which Joyless, Diana, Peregrine and the rest
listen to this play and pass comments on it often bear a striking
resemblance to the better known “Knight of the Burning Pestle.”

[137:1] “The Antipodes,” v., 9.

[137:2] A medical friend reminds me that there is, properly speaking,
no such thing as “melancholy false,” and that the characters mentioned
under this head are not suffering, in his opinion, from any form of
mental disease. I will therefore repeat here that the classification of
“melancholy” adopted in this chapter is _not_ a scientific one, that it
is made on a seventeenth century, rather than on a twentieth century
basis—we are trying, that is, to take up the positions of the several
dramatists. Few specialists of to-day would consider Jacques, Achilles
or Antonio to be in a state of disease, but that the Elizabethan doctor
would have diagnosed their malady as “melancholy” I have little doubt.
The ordinary spectator would probably not consider the question in any
detail.

[138:1] “Love’s Labour’s Lost,” Moth: i., 2, 9-10.

[139:1] “Mad Folk,” etc., p. 310.

[139:2] p. 128.

[140:1] “Love’s Labour’s Lost,” i., 1, 233, etc.

[140:2] “Troilus and Cressida,” ii., 3, 92, etc.

[140:3] Ibid., ii., 3, 132.

[140:4] Ibid., ii., 3, 180.

[140:5] Ibid., i., 3, 161, etc.

[141:1] “Merchant of Venice,” i., 1, 1, etc.

[141:2] Bucknill, “Mad Folk,” etc., p. 307.

[141:3] “Merchant of Venice,” iv., 1, 114, etc.

[142:1] “As You Like It,” iv., 1, 15, etc.

[142:2] Ibid., ii., 7, 60.

[143:1] Ibid., ii., 7, 67-9.

[144:1] “Merchant of Venice,” i., 1, 91-2.

[144:2] “King John,” iii., 4, 18.

[146:1] “Hamlet,” v., 2, 408.

[146:2] Ibid., iv., 7, 136—the King’s testimony.

[146:3] Ibid., i., 2, 131-2.

[146:4] Ibid., i., 2, 159.

[147:1] “Hamlet,” iv., 7, 119-20.

[149:1] “Shakespearean Tragedy,” p. 121.

[149:2] Ibid., p. 121.

[149:3] Beside the melancholy of Hamlet we might place that of
Haraldus, the young Prince of Shirley’s play, “_The Politician_,” were
it not that the part played by his melancholy is purely nominal. His
father—the Politician—sends two courtiers to cure him, and they make
him drunk. His excesses bring on a fever which causes his death. His
likeness to Hamlet only strikes us here and there, and the melancholy,
such as it is, is caused chiefly by the discovery that he is a bastard.




CHAPTER VII.

MAD FOLK IN COMEDY AND TRAGEDY—(iv.) DELUSIONS,
HALLUCINATIONS AND OTHER ABNORMAL STATES.

    “How now; who’s there? spirits, spirits?”

                                              (“_Spanish Tragedy._”)


Delusions and hallucinations occurring in cases of real madness we have
already encountered, but since these phenomena are themselves symptoms
of a disordered state of mind we must not neglect instances in which
they occur with persons otherwise sane. These spring to the memory;
who, for example, can ever forget the sights which Faustus sees in his
last hour on earth?

    “O, I’ll leap up to my God; who pulls me down?
     See, see, where Christ’s blood streams in the firmament.
     One drop would save my soul, half a drop—Ah, my Christ!
     Ah, rend not my heart for naming of my Christ!
     Yet will I call on Him: Oh, spare me, Lucifer!
     Where is it now? ’tis gone: And see where God
     Stretcheth out His arm, and bends His ireful brows;
     Mountains and hills, come, come and fall on me,
     And hide me from the heavy wrath of God.”[150:1]

More examples of such hallucinations in moments of great stress might
be quoted. It will best serve our purpose if we consider one typical
case (Frank, in “The Witch of Edmonton,”) and afterwards discuss a case
of special interest—that of Shakespeare’s Macbeth.

Frank Thorney, in “The Witch of Edmonton,” has married one Winifred,
but is forced into a bigamous marriage with Susan, whom he afterwards
murders, without letting any suspicion fall on himself. He is tormented
on his sick-bed by phantoms indistinguishable from realities, more
particularly by the ghost of Susan, and at last reveals to Winifred the
awful truth.

“I am not idle,” he says, and he is right. But thick-coming fancies
disturb him. The ghost of Susan appears. He stares at it fixedly, then
turns to the other side, only to be confronted again by the apparition.
When it vanishes he is raving of “a force in which were drawn a
thousand ghosts, leap’d newly from their graves, to pluck me into a
winding-sheet.” He has, so he says, “Some windmill in my brains for
want of sleep,” but sleep only comes with the unburdening of the guilty
conscience.[151:1]

Macbeth (like Frank Thorney) is at no time in the play insane, but
he becomes the victim of “horrible imaginings” which beyond a certain
point seem to him to be real.[152:1] Macbeth is predisposed to
hallucinations by a remarkably vivid power of imagination, which finds
expression from the very outset of the play. The mere suggestion of
the murder of Duncan he describes as a “horrid image” which unfixes
his hair and makes his seated heart knock at his ribs, against the use
of nature. Thus we have a character whose imagination torments him
throughout his career of crime till he has “supped full of horrors” and
the “taste of fears” has almost lost all significance.[152:2]

In the well-known “Dagger Scene”[152:3] we are confronted with the
first of Macbeth’s hallucinations. It is before the murder of Duncan,
and the spectral dagger only deceives him for a moment. Making an
unsuccessful attempt to clutch it, he is for a short moment at a loss
to explain a weapon which he can see but cannot handle. Then he rightly
concludes that it is but a “dagger of the mind, a false creation”; his
eyes “are made the fools o’ the other senses,” yet the image does not
disappear till courage comes again and with it “the heat of deeds.”

Duncan is murdered; “after life’s fitful fever he sleeps well,” but the
regicide’s better self torments him more and more, and the Lady fears
for his sanity:

                “These deeds must not be thought
    After these ways; so, it will make us mad.”[153:1]

Macbeth, however, is losing his self-control. At the moment of the
murder a fresh hallucination troubled him, and though its true nature
is now recognised, and he can “moralise” upon it, its very mention
fills the Lady with fears.

    “Methought I heard a voice cry, ‘Sleep no more!
     Macbeth doth murder sleep’. . . .
     Still it cried, ‘Sleep no more!’ to all the house:
     ‘Glamis hath murther’d sleep, and therefore Cawdor
     Shall sleep no more; Macbeth shall sleep no more.’”[153:2]

Dr. Bucknill, it is true, considers that this is not an hallucination,
on account of the word “methought.”[153:3] But the same word would
have been used of the dagger, which the critic himself admits to have
been an hallucination. Nor is the length of the fancied speeches any
obstacle, the greater part of the speech in which they occur being
Macbeth’s own embellishment of the event.

The hallucination at the banquet is more formidable. Macbeth, having
caused Banquo to be murdered—the murder being unknown to his
guests—is regretting his absence, “thus by a voluntary mental act
calling before his mind’s eye the image of the murdered man.”[154:1] At
the mention of him, an image rises in the place reserved for Macbeth
himself. It shakes its “gory locks” at the murderer, it nods but will
not speak, and only vanishes like the “air-drawn dagger,” when Macbeth
begins to overcome his fear and brave it. When he pledges Banquo it
appears again; once more he declaims violently against it and it
vanishes, but not before he has

        . . “displac’d the mirth, broke the good meeting
    With most admir’d disorder.”[154:2]

to say nothing of a certain amount of suspicion attached to it.

The remainder of the story, from the psychological point of view, can
best be told in Dr. Bucknill’s words.[154:3] “Macbeth,” he says, “saved
himself from actual insanity by rushing from the maddening horrors of
meditation into a course of decisive resolute action. From henceforth
he gave himself no time to reflect; he made the firstlings of his
heart the firstlings of his hand; he became a fearful tyrant to his
country; but he escaped madness. This change in him, however, effected
a change in his relation to his wife, which in her had the opposite
result. . . . Her attention, heretofore directed to her husband and to
outward occurrences, was forced inwards upon that wreck of all-content
which her meditation supplied.” She becomes mad; no medicine can
minister to her mind, diseased by crime and remorse, and her madness
is fatal. But Macbeth never becomes insane. “Some say he’s mad,” it is
true, yet

              “Others, that lesser hate him,
    Do call it valiant fury.”[155:1]

He has saved his own mental life, but he has flung away the “eternal
jewel” of his soul.

Lady Macbeth, at every point in the play, is strongly contrasted with
her husband. She is frankly distressed at the developments of Macbeth’s
criminal career. He bids her be “innocent of the knowledge” till she
applaud his deeds. She thus drifts farther away from him and leaves him
to pursue his bloody course alone. Her meditation breeds madness. She
lacks, even as her husband had done,

    “the season of all natures, sleep,”

being

            “Troubled with thick-coming fancies
    That keep her from her rest.”[155:2]

The scene in which she betrays her secret in her sleep is full of
significance, shewing the terrible impression made on her by the
murder of Duncan, and no less by the slaughter of Lady Macduff. After
her fainting fit, which follows the discovery of Duncan’s murder, she
ceases to occupy a prominent place in the tragedy. Her death is almost
unnoticed. Whether she died naturally or whether her attendants were
unable to keep from her the “means of all annoyance,” it is hard to
say. But once again Shakespeare shews his dramatic skill in relating
rather than portraying the scene of her death.

Returning to Macbeth, one must remark in conclusion that it is only
when Shakespeare’s art in delineating the various types of insanity
is studied as a whole that this character can be fully appreciated.
Yet even from a superficial examination of the play the value to the
dramatist of Macbeth’s hallucinations must be clear. For they not only
add to the scenic effect of the play, but they constitute a striking
contrast between the murderer and his wife, besides clarifying the
already powerful idea of his accusing imagination.

       *       *       *       *       *

We must now briefly consider another kind of abnormality which has
not yet been mentioned. Occasionally, in reading the dramatists of the
period, we meet with persons whom at first we suppose to be insane,
but who are, in reality, not so. Yet their states of mind are far
from normal. Occasionally they seem to be possessed by insane desires
and ambitions; sometimes lust has taken complete possession of them;
sometimes remorse, vengeance or similar passion dominates all their
actions. It is hard to point to any of their actions and to say: “That
is the act of a madman.” To-day, no doubt, did they exist in the flesh,
they would be removed to a Mental Hospital and treated for disease of
the mind. But looked at by their author and by his audience and in an
Elizabethan environment, they were not, in all probability, and in the
ordinary sense of the word, madmen. And for that reason we can only
allow them a passing consideration here, though every one of them would
repay detailed study.

One or two examples may be cited from Shakespeare—the first being
Constance, in “King John.” Dr. Bucknill, without the least hesitation,
styles her mad,—but he is a physician. Shakespeare, who may be
supposed to have known better, represents her as passionate by nature,
and half-demented with grief. But she is never more than half-crazy,
always retaining sufficient of her native strength of will to control
her wonderful imagination. Her own explanation of her conduct:

    “Grief fills the room up of my absent child,”[158:1]

is quite sufficient. Her reply to Pandulph’s accusation,

    “Lady, you utter madness, and not sorrow,”[158:2]

is conclusive proof that she is to be regarded as sane. She does
not, like many a lunatic, merely protest that she is not mad; she
gives what, according to the standard of the day, would pass as clear
evidence of her sanity:

    “I am not mad: this hair I tear is mine;
     My name is Constance; I was Geffrey’s wife;
     Young Arthur is my son, and he is lost!
     I am not mad; I would to heaven I were!
     For then, ’tis like I should forget myself . . .
     If I were mad, I should forget my son,
     Or madly think a babe of clouts were he.
     I am not mad; too well, too well I feel
     The different plague of each calamity.”[158:3]

Constance, even when her blemishes are taken into account, is a sublime
figure. At times the poet’s instinct seems for a moment to fail him;
his touch is less sure and his Fury becomes dangerously like a common
scold. But at her best she is unsurpassed, and if we wonder at the
skill with which Shakespeare portrays and utilises true madness on the
stage, we must not forget to withhold a portion of our admiration for
his sure-footed walk on the border line.

Timon of Athens, too, is a wonderful character—the wonder of the
play. A good-natured, generous and wealthy noble, he has attracted to
him crowds of parasites whom he calls friends, but who in reality do
nothing but receive his favours. At length he discovers their essential
baseness, and becoming, in his own words, “misanthropos” who “hates
mankind,”[159:1] leaves Athens, with oaths and curses, for a cave near
the sea-shore. There he ends his days—the manner of his death is
uncertain. His friends consider him beyond all doubt insane. A creditor
says that his debts “may well be called desperate ones, for a madman
owes ’em”;[159:2] others sum the matter up tersely by saying “Lord
Timon’s mad.”[159:3] Alcibiades excuses Timon’s behaviour on the ground
that

                                  “his wits
    Are drown’d and lost in his calamities.”[159:4]

Only Flavius, his faithful steward, gives no hint that he considers his
lord insane, though even he is struck with Timon’s unhappy condition,
so “full of decay and failing.”[159:5] Flavius, in this as in other
particulars, seems, like Ulysses, in “Troilus and Cressida” and other
characters in different plays, to be Shakespeare’s mouthpiece. There
is nothing in his representation of Timon which gives us cause to
impute madness to the protagonist. His state of mind is one of acute
depression, which we should call melancholia, were there any hint that
such a conception entered into the mind of the author. The condition of
Timon is not unlike that of Hamlet, and we could easily understand his
feigning madness to avoid the real evil coming upon him.

If any further proof were needed that Timon is not a maniac his
speeches would suffice. The objection that “all satire upon the
hollowness of the world would lose much of its point if it came from
the lips of an undoubted lunatic,”[160:1] is perfectly valid. In “King
Lear” the speeches which contain the most sarcasm, as well as the most
poetry, are those of the earlier scenes, in which Lear has not yet
become entirely a maniac. This kind of speech is characteristic of
Timon to the end. His very last words, though lacking the force of the
first outburst, are equally coherent and contain far more poetry:

    “Come not to me again: but say to Athens,
     Timon hath made his everlasting mansion
     Upon the beached verge of the salt flood;
     Who once a day with his embossed froth
     The turbulent surge shall cover; thither come
     And let my gravestone be your oracle.
     Lips, let sour words go by and language end:
     What is amiss plague and infection mend!
     Graves only be men’s works and death their gain!
     Sun, hide thy beams! Timon hath done his reign.”[161:1]

A character far more repulsive, but depicted with the greatest force,
is Malefort Senior, of Massinger’s “Unnatural Combat.” Malefort is an
Admiral of Marseilles who is challenged by his apostate son to a duel
and comes off victorious, the son being slain. Shortly afterwards,
Theocrine, Malefort’s daughter, is sought in marriage by the son of the
Governor; the father consents, but his strange extravagances towards
her, as he loads her with jewels, riches and a superfluity of caresses,
is generally commented upon, and before long it appears that he has
fallen in love with her. The remainder of the plot hastens to the
catastrophe, Theocrine being dishonoured and virtually murdered by a
false friend of her father’s. Malefort himself is persecuted by ghosts,
and is finally killed by a flash of lightning.

A modern author would no doubt represent such a character as Malefort
as suffering from some mental disease, but Massinger appears to have
considered the unnatural passion of the father for his daughter as
the fruit of the unnatural combat in which he kills his son. He cares
more for the development of this idea than for the mental condition
of Malefort, who speaks, in one place, of his son’s blood as growing
upon him like Hercules’ poisoned shirt, though he seems also to feel an
inward cause of his passion which he cannot explain. Montreville, the
false friend, supposes that he may be mad, and recommends:

    “A deep-read man, that can with charms and herbs
     Restore you to your reason.”[162:1]

But from the general character of the play it is easy to see that he is
not considered insane.

Here, then, we have an attempt made to subject an outrageous and
unnatural passion, the manifestations of which bear at times the
closest resemblance to mania, to the dramatic treatment of tragedy.
That Massinger has wholly succeeded, few would be rash enough to
assert. He has given us a grim and ghastly picture, full of brute
strength but wanting in that higher power which restrains and subdues.
He has created a character at times human, always terrible, but only
partially effective in the highest sense of the word.

It is probable that if Constance and Malefort had been portrayed
as mad and not merely as possessed by an overpowering passion, the
result in each case would have been a considerable dramatic gain.
The death of the Lady Constance “in a frenzy”—like the deaths of
Lady Macbeth and the Queen in “Cymbeline”—is only reported by a
messenger. Had that frenzy actually been depicted, the result would
have been a weakening of the whole plot, but a decided increase in
the effectiveness of Constance. In the two plays which we shall now
consider, a comparatively poor theme is treated in such a way that the
passion portrayed is heightened,—without being raised, however, to the
level of madness. It is interesting to speculate on the result had this
been done—whether the madness would have elevated the drama or whether
the paucity or the inconsequence of the theme would have debased the
presentation of insanity.

Grimaldi, the remorse-stricken renegade of Massinger’s play “The
Renegado,” who first immures a young girl, and afterwards repents, is
reduced in the fourth act to a state approaching insanity. He is a
poor sort of creature, at any rate until the concluding portion of the
play, where he contrives a remarkable stratagem which brings about the
dénouement. His remorse bears many of the signs of madness, and indeed
may have been intended for such by the author. For days he has taken no
food; the mention of the words “church” and “high altar” increases his
melancholy; his speech ends ever with “those dreadful words damnation
and despair.”[163:1] His “ravings” lead him to contemplate all kinds of
extravagances; he would do a “bloody justice” on himself, pull out his
eyes, lop off his legs, and give his body to those whom he has injured.
He does none of these things, however,—a Jesuit priest, habited like a
Bishop, curing him by the very simple means of granting him absolution.
The wild ravings give place to calmer expressions of contrition and
he goes off with a riming couplet! It is unnecessary to follow him;
one only wishes that the extreme nature of his remorse had not made it
advisable for us to include such a creature, for whom little can be
felt but contempt.

Our last example is Memnon, in Fletcher’s play, “The Mad Lover.” Here
is a character for whom we cannot help entertaining some regard, but we
are at a loss to know what exactly to make of him. If he is really mad,
as seems at first sight unlikely, it is a very unreal kind of madness,
with more dramatic purpose than realism. One of the characters,
indeed, calls him “stupid mad,” and the term is not an inapt one. We
should be inclined to group him with the pretenders, but for three
considerations. Firstly, he never declares nor even hints to anyone
that he is not what he seems, as Hamlet does to Horatio and as Memnon
himself might with perfect ease have done—for example, to Siphax. Then
his recovery, however sudden, complete and unreal, is only the sort
of thing one would expect from Fletcher, and may be left out of the
question. Lastly, in the scene where he refuses the whore, it is true
that he shews considerable sagacity and discrimination. Nevertheless
it is no more than has actually been found in “cases” arising from
the same cause as Memnon’s. Yet obviously, as we shall see, the mad
lover is not mad in the acceptation of the word then common, and the
hypothesis of an abnormal passion will meet the case, better perhaps
than if we consider our hero either mad or sane.

The plot has already been sketched, and a few references should make
this statement clear. The lover’s rude courtship is the fruit of long
campaignings and absence from court; when he is told by his friend
of the strange impression he has made he speaks perfectly rationally
and merely becomes confirmed in his purpose. The extravagant idea of
cutting out his heart is the first sign of the strength of his passion.
Yet his soliloquy:

    “’Tis but to die. Dogs do it, ducks with dabbling,
     Birds sing away their souls, and babies sleep ’em . . .”[165:1]

is spoken in a temper quite unlike the madman’s. His argument might
even by some be considered valid: “For in the other world she is bound
to have me,” he says, “Her princely word is past.” When others enter,
he grows wilder, and throughout the play talks in the most extravagant
vein, more particularly to the surgeon whom he tries to persuade to cut
out his heart. “Here I am, sir,” says Memnon,

    “Come, look upon me, view the best way boldly;
     Fear nothing, but cut home. If your hand shake, sirrah,
     Or any way deface my heart i’ the cutting,
     Make the least scratch upon it . . . .
                    . . . I’ll slice thee to the soul. . . .
     I will not have you smile, sirrah, when you do it,
     As though you cut a lady’s corn; ’tis scurvy.
     Do me it, as thou dost thy prayers, seriously.”[166:1]

Here is a man whose mind is certainly in an abnormal condition, and,
whatever the precise nature of that condition may be, it alone gives
to the play the least vestige of probability. If Memnon were sane, the
play would be absurd; if he were mad, then madness would once more be
degraded. As it is, he is not an unpleasing fellow; at times he is
even touched with pathos: any verdict on him would assuredly be more
favourable than a just verdict on the play as a whole.


FOOTNOTES:

[150:1] Dr. Faustus, l. 1419, etc. (Oxford text.)

[151:1] The insanity of Ann Ratcliff, in this play, may also be
noticed, though it is of the same rude type as that of Greene’s
Orlando. “See, see, see,” she cries, “the Man in the Moon has built a
new windmill, and what running there’s from all quarters of the city,
to learn the art of grinding.” The only feature of interest in her
frenzy is the expression of physical pain which we noticed in “King
Lear.” Her ribs are like to break, and “there’s a Lancashire horn-pipe
in my throat. Hark how it tickles it, with Doodle, doodle, doodle,
doodle,” etc.

[152:1] With Macbeth might be compared two other remorse-stricken
murderers in little known plays. Glapthorne’s “Albertus Wallenstein”
is the story of a man who causes his son and his son’s betrothed to
be killed and is then haunted by his crimes. His soul “is shaken with
a nipping frost”; he mistakes his son’s page for a ghost and murders
him; after this false visions of spirits are ever before him. Only
when mortally wounded by conspirators is his mind at rest. In Denham’s
“Sophy” (which is in spirit outside our period, though it was acted in
1641), Abbas, King of Persia, is likewise tormented by the ghosts of
those whom he has murdered. Abbas, unlike Macbeth and Wallenstein, is
quite a maniac, and does not recover his senses before his death.

[152:2] cf. “Macbeth,” v., 5, 9, etc. “I have almost forgot the taste
of fears . . .”

[152:3] Act ii., Scene 1.

[153:1] “Macbeth,” ii., 3, 32-3.

[153:2] Ibid., ii., 2, 35, etc.

[153:3] “Mad Folk,” etc., p. 20.

[154:1] Ibid., p. 24.

[154:2] “Macbeth,” iii., 4, 109.

[154:3] “Mad Folk,” etc., p. 29.

[155:1] “Macbeth,” v., 2, 13.

[155:2] Ibid., v., 2, 37-8.

[158:1] “King John,” iii., 4, 93.

[158:2] l. 43.

[158:3] ll. 45, etc.

[159:1] “Timon of Athens,” iv., 3, 53.

[159:2] Ibid., iii., 4, 101-2.

[159:3] Ibid., iii., 6, 129.

[159:4] Ibid., iv., 3, 88.

[159:5] Ibid., iv., 3, 465.

[160:1] Raised and disputed by Bucknill, “Mad Folk,” etc., p. 259.

[161:1] “Timon of Athens,” v., 1, 217, etc.

[162:1] “The Unnatural Combat,” iv., 1.

[163:1] “The Renegado,” iv., 1.

[165:1] “The Mad Lover,” ii., 1.

[166:1] Ibid., iii., 2.




CHAPTER VIII.

MAD FOLK IN COMEDY AND TRAGEDY.

(vi.) THE PRETENDERS.

    “I am but mad north-north-west. When the wind is southerly, I
    know a hawk from a handsaw.”

                                                       (“_Hamlet._”)


Last of all in the long train of madmen which has now almost passed
us come the Pretenders—characters who have feigned insanity for
some purpose. We need not, of course, devote much space here to
pseudo-lunatics like Morose in “The Silent Woman,” Bellamont in
“Northward Ho,” Malvolio and Christopher Sly. These are all sane enough
and have no wish to be thought otherwise. They are victimised by the
pretences of others, and shew none of the signs which were supposed
to characterise insanity. Thus they have small interest for us and no
place in the present section.

A somewhat different example may be taken from Day’s “Law
Tricks,”[167:1] where Polymetes, son of the reigning Duke, pretends, on
his father’s sudden return from a long journey, to be deeply immersed
in his studies, in order to avert the Duke’s reproaches for his neglect
and loose living. His page, a boy “worth his weight in pearl,” comes
to the Duke with a cock-and-bull story about an “English poet” who is
with the Prince. This is presently supplemented by Julio, who explains
that “the boy is lunatic.” His description of the supposed origin
of the lunacy is most interesting. “Coming abruptly to the Prince’s
chamber about some ordinary service, I found him in his study and a
company of bottle-nosed devils dancing the Irish hay about him, which
on the sudden so started the poor boy as he clean lost his wits, and
ever since talks thus idle as your Excellence hath heard him.” The
“studies” of Polymetes, it later appears, are in astrology!

The “true Pretenders”—if the term may be allowed—have on the other
hand considerable interest, and are well worthy of attention. Among
other things we may take into consideration the intention with which
they are portrayed, how far they fulfil that intention, how closely
they counterfeit insanity—if any such attempt is really made,—and
what worth they have as characters—how nearly, in other words, they
resemble men and women.

Beginning at the bottom of the scale, let us take Middleton’s
“Changeling,” a play already studied, in which Antonio, the
“Changeling” of the piece, counterfeits idiocy, and Franciscus his
companion, pretends to be a madman. Their devices, which form the
substance of a somewhat coarse underplot, are not successful. This
would surprise nobody; the intention of the author (or authors) being
mainly comic relief, little care is shewn and the characters are
almost worthless. Franciscus says in the last scene, “I was changed
from a little wit to be stark mad”; and Antonio, “I was changed too
from a little ass as I was to a great fool as I am!”[169:1] The last
statement we can take literally. For, after all, idiocy is fairly easy
to counterfeit, and he would be a fool indeed who could not do at least
equally well. Franciscus is rather better, and might really be very
effective on the stage. He is supposed to have “run mad for love,” and
was a “pretty poet” till the muses forsook him. He discourses most
appropriately of “Titania” and “flowery banks,” invokes his imaginary
mistress, and pledges her in imaginary wine.[169:2] He succeeds in
extorting the pity of Isabella with his ravings. The least spark
sets him alight; the mere mention of “Luna” is sufficient for him to
rhapsodise upon, and he works himself up to a state of violence which
has to be calmed by the whip. His snatches of song are equally true
to life. But he does not re-appear for any length of time after this
scene, and he never again reaches the same level of excellence. Apart
from this skill in counterfeit Franciscus appears to have no character
worthy of the name, and is therefore of small importance.

Something has already been said of the shopkeeper’s wife, Tormiella,
of Dekker’s tragi-comedy “Match me in London”; here, as in “The
Changeling,” and as in many another minor play, the feigned madness is
utilised for the plot and makes little difference to the character.
We have seen that Dekker has shewn considerable skill in weaving this
pretended madness into the plot as well as in introducing it at a
favourable place. But the scene is so short, and its place in the play
of such relatively small importance, that we need do no more here than
repeat that the “feigning” is well done and serves its purpose.

Space may also be found for Dol in Jonson’s “Alchemist.” She goes mad
for the benefit of Sir Epicure Mammon in the fourth act of the play,
but unfortunately the learned dramatist infuses little probability into
her feigning. She is not so successful a lunatic as Quarlous, though
her task is certainly less simple. She appears before Mammon “in her
fit of raving” to discourse of “Alexander’s death,” the “communion of
vowels and consonants,” “Pythagoras,” “the tongue of Eber and Javan”
and so forth. The alleged reason for this is given us earlier in the
play in a speech by Face already quoted.[170:1]

In the “Honest Whore,”[171:1] Bellafront, for her own purposes,
feigns madness. Her pretence is skilful, though Friar Anselmo does not
consider her dangerous. “How now, huswife,” he says good-humouredly,
“whether gad you?” “A-nutting forsooth,” answers Bellafront, “How do
you, gaffer? How do you, gaffer? there’s a French curt’sy for you too.”
“Do you not know me?” she enquires. “No,” reply all. “What are they?”
asks Anselmo, “come tell me, what are they?” Her answer reminds us of
“Hamlet.” “They’re fish-wives,” she says, “will you buy any gudgeons?”
At a later stage in the proceedings, she is anxious to tell everyone’s
fortunes and demands sugar-plums as a reward. This madness, however, is
not without method, for the fortune-telling leads to discoveries and
explanations. When at last Matheo, whom Bellafront wishes to marry,
declares that if her wits are restored he will consent, she at once
reveals her sanity:

                “Matheo, thou art mine.
    I am not mad; but put on this disguise
    Only for you.”

We now come without any further slips of prolixity to the only two
pretenders for whom we can entertain the least enthusiasm—to the
classical examples of feigned madness in English Drama, Edgar and
Hamlet.

Edgar is represented as simulating “Poor Tom” of Bedlam, one of the
lunatics who roamed about the countryside, possessed by the “foul
fiend,” and dependent upon such charity as kindly hearts might prompt.
How well he counterfeits need only be suggested. It is, after all, an
easy matter for an author to portray feigned madness for a scene or two
with something like accuracy. But what a genius is required to lead his
pretender, so to say, “through fire and through flame,” place him in
all kinds of situations, cause him to change his disguise from lunatic
to peasant, then back to lunatic again, marking all the time by subtle
touches the most delicate shades of expression. The burthen of his cry,
as one would expect, is “Poor Tom’s a-cold. . . . The foul fiend follows
me.” Persistently he raves and consistently, but at times “the natural
touch” overcomes him,

    “My tears begin to take his part so much
     They mar my counterfeiting.”[172:1]

An even more wonderful effect of art is pointed out by Mr. Cowden
Clarke. Gloster, now blind, would seem to recognise amidst the wild
ravings of his son “some tone or inflection in Edgar’s voice . . . and
he links (his son’s conduct) with that of Lear’s daughters. Edgar,
instinctively feeling this, perseveres with his Bedlam cry, to drown
the betrayed sound of his own voice and maintain the impression of his
assumed character.” If this is really Shakespeare’s art and not the
imagination of the critic—as some might think it to be—it is but one
more illustration of his dramatic genius.

Apart from such details as these, the character of Edgar, especially
during his feigned madness, is a genuine masterpiece. At times during
the play he has certainly some of the frigidity—closely allied to
a quality which is dangerously like self-righteousness—which marks
Shakespeare’s own Isabella. But in these scenes of madness he is all
tenderness and forgiveness. His compassion on his blinded father we
feel the more keenly in contrast with Gloster’s own conduct and the
ingratitude of Lear’s children. Edgar is Shakespeare at his best and
truest—he rings true—we may even say that he stands for Truth itself.
And thus his feigned madness is no ordinary stage-device requisitioned
by an unmanageable plot. It has uses connected with the plot, indeed,
but beyond these it brings out characteristics of the man which endear
him to the most hostile spectator.

Lastly we come to Hamlet and his feigned madness. Like most of the
Pretenders he is introduced into a play where real madness also plays
a part, but unlike any of them he is actually in a condition verging
on madness. Possibly it is by a kind of self-preservative instinct
that he chooses that disguise for his purpose of deceiving the King.
Fortunately he is able to prevent his mind actually giving way, and so
he defeats the King’s designs, seeing “a cherub that sees them.” He
shrinks from nothing; his demeanour towards those whom he loves, and
especially towards Ophelia, fully bears out his supposed affliction. He
appears with doublet all unbraced,

    “No hat upon his head, his stockings foul’d,
     Ungarter’d and down-gyved to his ancle;
     Pale as his shirt, his knees knocking each other,
     And with a look so piteous in purport
     As if he had been loosed out of hell
     To speak of horrors.”[174:1]

His attitude and his words seem to confirm the judgment of Polonius:
“This is the very ecstasy of love.”[174:2] He is caught in no trap. The
presence of Rosencrantz and Guildenstern does not suffice to

    “Get from him why he puts on this confusion
     Grating so harshly all his days of quiet
     With turbulent and dangerous lunacy.”[174:3]

Only the faithful Horatio knows that; elsewhere Hamlet “keeps aloof”
from the topic with true madman’s instinct, whenever his state is
mentioned. The King pretends to Polonius that while the disease is not
so serious as it seems, only Hamlet’s absence from Denmark can prevent
it from becoming so. In this way he gets him removed. But throughout
the play, whether in his attempts to deceive the Court or in his
foiling of the King’s design, Hamlet acts with what might be called the
craft of true madness.

It is unnecessary to insist on the complexity and the lifelike truth
of Hamlet’s character. No personage in the world’s drama has excited
more criticism. The Prince of Denmark is on all sides acknowledged to
be supreme. And for that reason it is needless to attempt to prove what
otherwise would be the main contention of this chapter—that Hamlet is
in every way the greatest of the Pretenders whom we have studied, and,
indeed, of the madmen, true and false, who form the subject of this
essay.


FOOTNOTES:

[167:1] Act iv., scene 2.

[169:1] “The Changeling,” v., 3.

[169:2] Ibid., iii., 3.

[170:1] Page 14, note 2.

[171:1] “Honest Whore,” v., 13.

[172:1] “King Lear,” iii., 6, 63-4.

[174:1] “Hamlet,” ii., 1, 78, etc.

[174:2] Ibid., l. 102.

[174:3] Ibid., iii., 1, 2-4.




CHAPTER IX.

CONCLUSION.—SHAKESPEARE AND HIS CONTEMPORARIES.

    “All pains the immortal spirit must endure,
     All weakness which impairs, all griefs which bow,
     Find their sole speech in that victorious brow.”

                                  (_Matthew Arnold: “Shakespeare.”_)


In such a study as this, dealing largely with the work of Shakespeare’s
contemporaries, it is to be hoped that it will not be out of place to
centre the concluding portion around Shakespeare himself. It is but one
aspect of our study to compare our greatest dramatist and his fellows
with respect to their presentation of madness, and it is throwing a
dim light on Shakespeare’s greatness to make the comparison in such a
trivial sphere. Our conclusion is thus doubly insignificant, yet we
enter upon it nevertheless. For if it tells us nothing that is new, it
serves at least to strengthen our present convictions, and this from an
entirely new standpoint. We shall, then, compare Shakespeare and his
contemporaries from three points of view: in their general ideas and
sentiments concerning madness, in their dramatic use of madness, and in
their representation of mad folk as complete figures, the Elizabethan
dramatists bow one and all before their master.


_General Ideas and Sentiments._

1. To a certain extent, in madness as in other departments of life,
Shakespeare took over the general notions of his day and introduced
them fairly liberally into his work. He could hardly do otherwise,
for the subject of lunacy was so commonplace and found so ready a way
into ordinary conversation that the dramatist who, like Shakespeare,
mirrored the life and speech of every day, would find himself, even
against his will, borrowing figures from Bedlam. Many of these we
have already noticed; a very few more will show the diversity of the
references. The shipwrecked mariners in “The Tempest,” “felt a fever of
the mad and play’d Some tricks of desparation.” Theseus speaks of “The
lunatic, the lover and the poet” as being “of imagination all compact.”
Rosalind mentions “the dark house and the whip,” Romeo the prison, the
bonds and the torments, Othello the popular view of the influence of
the moon. This breadth of treatment in casual allusions alone might
be contrasted with the meagre work of his contemporaries. But we must
pass on to notice that Shakespeare himself was far in advance of his
time, seeing in some way features of insanity which were commonly
overlooked, and using remedies which we consider quite “modern,” even
to-day. His tests for insanity are certainly somewhat crude, but they
occur rather as allusions, where, as we have seen, he adopted the ideas
of his day, than in full-length portraits, in which he is remarkably
exact. A physician of the last century[178:1] remarks on Lear: “Lear’s
is a genuine case of insanity from the beginning to the end, such as
we often see in aged persons. On reading it we cannot divest ourselves
of the idea that it is a real case correctly reported.” This is high
praise; and although Shakespeare hardly requires such commendation, it
is interesting to notice the small details which are true to life. We
have such phrases in “King Lear” as

                  “O Lear, Lear, Lear!
    Beat at this gate that let thy folly in,
    And thy dear judgment out,”[178:2]

where the old king beats his head, as

    “O let me not be mad, not mad, sweet heaven!
     Keep me in temper; I would not be mad,”[178:3]

as:

    “O how this mother swells up towards my heart!”[178:4]

“My wits begin to turn,” “I am cut to the brains,” and the like. These
are touches which can be paralleled by none other of the authors who
have been dealt with in this study. They are the result of a shrewd,
penetrating observation applied to those mental phenomena which were
displayed before the gaze of any who cared to notice them. If we would
contrast genius with mediocrity, we have only to look at the general
attitude of Shakespeare’s contemporaries towards madness and their
representation of it. Take the scene of Lear’s partial restoration to
reason. With its soft, sweet music, with the loving faces surrounding
the sleeping sufferer, with the gradual re-awakening of sanity—what a
contrast there is between this and the metamorphosis of Memnon, the mad
lover, or even the rude art of Ford when he pictures the restoration of
Meleander.


_Dramatic use of Madness._

2. The superiority of Shakespeare, again, in his dramatic use of
madness! If there is one thing more than another which arrests a
student of this subject it is Shakespeare’s refusal to sacrifice so
grand a passion to the interests of comedy, to expose it as a butt for
the jests of the groundlings and a subject for idle conversation. His
madmen are among his sublimest figures; he introduces them, not after
the manner of Dekker and Middleton, as characters of light comedy,
but as the agents or the victims of tragedy, “more sinned against
than sinning.” They contribute to no coarse underplot, they are not
introduced to enhance the supposed terrors of melodrama—they form part
of the plot itself, are inextricably interwoven with it, colour its
very texture, determine its whole character. This is no imagination,
but sheer fact. “Lear” _is_ the mad king. The word “Hamlet” calls up
an image, either of the hero’s “antic disposition” or (which is still
more likely) of the lonely pathos of Ophelia in her last passion.
Think, on the contrary, of Shakespeare’s contemporaries. There is
Fletcher, whose Mad Lover certainly colours the play, but what a play
of farce and absurdity! There is Webster, whose sole use of the madman
is for the pageantry, and for the intensification by means of it of
the effect of his catastrophe. Or there is Dekker, who paints the
interior of a Bedlam, for the same reason as elsewhere he leads us
into a brothel-house—for the sake of a so-called realism. Or, if you
prefer it, there is Middleton, whose madmen supply material for the
introduction of a trivial underplot and a few coarse jests and songs.
Nowhere, except perhaps in Ford, who appears to have been attracted by
insanity, to have studied it and to have painted it with some insight
and sympathy, is there any approach in this body of drama to the
sustained excellence of Shakespeare.


_Mad Folk._

3. The same fact emerges when we take the complete figures and consider
them, as has been done, from a purely literary standpoint. We need
not go over the whole story again; it will be sufficient if we cast
our eye back over each group and seize upon the most prominent figures
in it. Take Trouble-all, Meleander, Shattillion, and the Passionate
Madman, and, following the prescription which Paulina gives to Leontes
in the “Winter’s Tale,” choose the best traits from each, concentrate,
add, improve—and you are still far from the august figure of Lear.
Surround Ophelia with the heroines of Beaumont, Fletcher, and Ford.
Will anyone assert that either Aspatia, or the Gaoler’s Daughter, or
Penthea approaches the fair Ophelia? Take the Pretenders: where have
you so admirable a pretence as that of Hamlet, a pretence so realistic
that many critics of to-day maintain that it is reality, and most
allow that, if not actually mad, the Prince of Denmark was perilously
near a state of insanity? It is certainly not in the antics of the boy
of Polymetes, or of the fool “Tony” represented in “The Changeling.”
Considered from this point of view alone, there is no pretender who
does the thing so well as Hamlet,—as a masterpiece of literary art no
character can touch him. If anyone could be said to have the slightest
claim to do so it would be Shakespeare’s own Edgar, less important in
relation to the plot, far less universal in his appeal to mankind as a
representative of humanity, yet perhaps more wonderfully impressive in
the place he occupies than any other personage could possibly be.

Or let us look at that unimportant yet not wholly negligible group of
persons who have been made the victims of others, written down as asses
by the world at large, and are cowering over there in a corner. Even
here we see that Shakespeare’s figures are by far the most noteworthy.
Morose is not uninteresting, and the dismay of Bellamont, the
“reverent” poet, as he is apprehended for a madman and seems to be in
danger of confinement in Bedlam, is quite a diverting incident in the
plot. But compare them with Shakespeare’s figures. Here is Christopher
Sly, “old Sly’s son of Burton-heath, by birth a pedlar, by education a
card-maker, by transmutation a bear-herd, and now by present profession
a tinker.” There is individuality here, conveyed in a few lines,—which
are quite sufficient, notwithstanding, to stamp the character with the
impress of Shakespeare’s seal. Better still, take Malvolio, who is
accused of madness for a jest, but whose character as previously drawn
would make an admirable reason for the jest being taken seriously. So
much does he take things to heart that Sir Toby thinks he may actually
go mad through disappointment. “Why, thou hast put him in such a dream
that when the image of it leaves him he must run mad.”[183:1] Thorough
as always, true to life, this is very Shakespeare: none other can
approach him in his own arena of the stage.

       *       *       *       *       *

The last figure seems to have disappeared from the stage, the unmeaning
groups of madmen have dispersed, and with them the crowd. We turn to
go. Yet, as for a moment we look back on the scene we have just left,
a solitary figure meets our eye. It is no madman, no pretender, and no
dupe. It is just the Fool, the Fool unparalleled, the Fool of Lear. Ere
his master’s afflictions could drive him mad like that master, he went
“to bed at noon.” Now he returns to remind us of his other master,—of
his creator,—who painted him on the same canvas which holds Edgar and
Lear, a figure

                        “sublime
    With tears and laughter for all time.”

With no more fitting words, inasmuch as they describe not alone the
Fool but all Shakespeare’s mad folk, could we close our study.


FOOTNOTES:

[178:1] Dr. Brigham.

[178:2] “King Lear,” i., 4, 292.

[178:3] Ibid., i., 5, 50.

[178:4] Ibid., ii., 4, 53, and passim.

[183:1] “Twelfth Night,” ii., 5, 211.




BIBLIOGRAPHY.


1. HISTORY AND CRITICISM.

    The Cambridge History of English Literature.

    English Dramatic Literature—A. W. Ward.

    History of English Poetry—W. J. Courthope.

    The Mad Folk of Shakespeare—Dr. Bucknill.

    Notes on Shakespeare in various editions—notably the Variorum.

    Shakespearean Tragedy—A. C. Bradley.

    Shakespeare, his mind and art—Ed. Dowden.

    Introductions to the various editions mentioned below under
        “Drama.”

    Notes and Lectures—S. T. Coleridge.

    Francis Beaumont—G. C. Macaulay.

    The Oxford Dictionary—passim.

    Encyclopædia Britannica—s.v. Insanity.

    History of the Insane in the British Isles—Tuke.

    The Psychology of Insanity—B. Hart.

    Survey of London—Stow, ed. Kingsford.

    “Have with you to Saffron Walden”—Nash.

    “The Belman of London”—Dekker.

    “Anatomie of the Bodie of Man”—Vicary.

    “Nymphidia”—Drayton.

    “The Battle of Agincourt”—Drayton.


2. DRAMA.

The Works of:

             Shakespeare            Globe Edn. (and others).
             Lyly                   edn. 1858.
             Marlowe                Oxford Press.
             Beaumont & Fletcher    ed. Dyce (11 vol.).
             Massinger              ed. Gifford (4 vol.).
             Webster                Mermaid Edn.
             Ford                   ed. Gifford (2 vol.).
             Middleton              ed. Bullen (8 vol.).
             Dekker                 ed. Pearson (4 vol.).
             Jonson                 Mermaid Edn.
             Marston                ed. Bullen.
             Shirley                ed. Dyce; ed. Gifford.
             Brome                  edn. 1873.
             Day                    ed. Bullen.
    Chettle: Hoffman                ed. 1852.

N.B.—References are to the editions named above. Specific notes are
given where possible to all quotations directly bearing on the subject
of the essay.




INDEX OF WORKS DEALT WITH OR QUOTED.

[_The letters ff. denote that the work is dealt with in some detail in
the pages referred to._]


    “Albertus Wallenstein.” 152.

    “Alchemist, The.” 14, 170.

    “American Journal of Insanity.” 67.

    “Anatomie of the Bodie of Man, The.” 13.

    “Anatomy of Melancholy, The.” 8-9, 27, 126.

    “Antipodes, The.” 92, 134 ff.

    “As You Like It.” 6, 28, 137, 139, 142-4, 177.


    “Ball, The.” 12.

    “Bartholomew Fair.” 23, 53-4, 113 ff., 181.

    “Battle of Agincourt, The.” 5.

    “Belman of London, The.” 26.

    “Bird in a Cage, The.” 29.

    “Broken Heart, The.” 51, 87, 128, 181.

    “Bulwark of Defence, A.” 14.


    “Caliban upon Setebos.” 121-2.

    “Changeling, The.” 12, 25, 32 ff., 48, 50, 58, 124, 168 ff., 181.

    “City Wit, The.” 12.

    “Comedy of Errors, The.” 15, 20, 52.

    “Compendious Pygment, etc., A.” 27.

    “Coronation, The,” 12.

    “Cymbeline.” 52, 119, 120, 125, 127, 162.


    “Dr. Faustus.” 150.

    “Duchess of Malfi, The.” 18, 21, 25, 41, 46, 51, 103 ff.


    “Elizabethan Literature” (Saintsbury). 90.

    “Emperor of the East.” 14.

    “English Dramatic Literature” (Ward). 56, 89.

    “English Moor, The.” 11.

    “Epicene.” 19, 23, 25, 52, 167, 182.


    “Færie Queene, The.” 87.

    “Fair Quarrel, A.” 11.


    “Gentleman Usher, The.” 119.


    “Hamlet.” 19, 20, 22, 23, 24, 47, 49, 50, 51, 56, 60, 75 ff., 81,
        82, 87, 88, 89, 91, 97, 107, 129, 144 ff., 160, 164, 173 ff.,
        180, 181.

    “Have with you to Saffron Walden.” 122.

    “Henry VI., Part II.” 14.

    “Hoffman, The Tragedy of.” 96 ff., 119-20.

    “Honest Whore, The.” 20, 23, 29, 32 ff., 58, 171.


    “Julius Cæsar.” 52, 149.


    “King John.” 4, 21, 52, 128, 139, 144, 157 ff., 162.

    “King Lear.” 3, 10-11, 26, 27, 37, 43, 44, 45, 47, 48, 49, 50, 60,
        66 ff., 80, 93, 95, 121, 122 ff., 151, 160, 172 ff., 178-9, 180,
        181, 183.

    “Knight of the Burning Pestle, The.” 136.


    “Law Tricks.” 16, 167-8.

    “Lover’s Melancholy, The.” 18, 21, 23, 24, 55, 91 ff., 128, 179,
        181.

    “Love’s Labour’s Lost.” 5, 35, 138, 140.


    “Macbeth.” 9, 43, 47, 149, 151 ff., 162.

    “Mad Folk of Shakespeare, The.” 70, 79, 141, 142, 153, 154-5.

    “Mad Lover, The.” 7, 54-5, 164 ff., 179.

    “Maid’s Tragedy, The.” 128 ff., 134, 138, 139, 181.

    “Match me in London.” 16, 55, 56-8, 170.

    “Measure for Measure.” 76, 173.

    “Merchant of Venice, The.” 82, 137, 139, 141, 144.

    “Merry Wives of Windsor, The.” 16.

    “Midsummer Night’s Dream, A.” 6, 177.

    “Mother Bombie.” 120-1.

    “Much Ado about Nothing.” 15, 28.


    “New Way to Pay Old Debts, A.” 53, 102 ff.

    “Nice Valour, The.” See “Passionate Madman.”

    “Noble Gentleman, The.” 105, 108 ff., 116-7, 132, 134, 181.

    “Northern Lass, The.” 30, 127, 132 ff.

    “Northward Ho!” 32 ff., 48, 52, 167.

    “Nymphidia,” 17.


    “Old Wives’ Tale, The.” 65.

    “Orlando Furioso.” 61 ff., 151.

    “Othello.” 12, 44, 85, 149, 177.


    “Passionate Madman, The.” 105 ff., 134, 181.

    “Philaster.” 5, 19, 129, 131 ff., 138, 139.

    “Pilgrim, The.” 12, 32 ff., 48.

    “Politician, The.” 149.

    “Popish Impostures, A Dictionary of.” 11.


    “Renegado, The.” 163-4.

    “Richard II.” 139, 142.

    “Romeo and Juliet.” 6, 14, 28, 177.


    “Shakespeare, his Mind and Art.” 66.

    “Shakespearean Tragedy.” 122-3, 125, 148-9.

    “Silent Woman, The.” See “Epicene.”

    “Sophy, The.” 152.

    “Spanish Tragedy, The.” 62 ff.

    “Survey of London, A.” 31.


    “Taming of the Shrew, The.” 17, 128, 167, 182.

    “Tempest, The.” 121, 177.

    “Timon of Athens.” 4, 159 ff., 161.

    “’Tis pity she’s a Whore.” 119.

    “Troilus and Cressida.” 6, 18, 125, 137, 139, 140-1, 159.

    “Twelfth Night.” 10, 21, 37, 52, 128, 139, 167, 182-3.

    “Two Noble Kinsmen, The.” 7, 49, 81 ff., 91, 97, 132, 134, 181.


    “Unnatural Combat, The.” 161, 162.


    “Very Woman, A.” 99 ff., 133 ff., 139.

    “Vulgar Errors.” 14.


    “What you will” (Marston). 29.

    “Winter’s Tale, The.” 5, 181.

    “Witch, The.” 9.

    “Witch of Edmonton, The.” 151.


    W. HEFFER & SONS LTD.,
    104, HILLS ROAD, CAMBRIDGE.




      *      *      *      *      *      *




Transcriber’s note:

Variations in spelling and hyphenation have been left as in the
original. Words with and without accents appear as in the original.

Ellipses match the original.

The cover image was created by the transcriber and is placed in the
public domain.

The Table of Contents’ entry for the Preface was added by the
Transcriber.

The following corrections have been made to the original text:

    Page 14: “Romeo and Juliet” (iv., 3,[original has a period]
    47-8)

    On page 19, footnote anchor [19:3] has been added by the
    Transcriber.

    Page 20: Guildenstern’s[original has “Guildernstern’s”] account
    of Hamlet

    Page 31: mad-houses in the Seventeenth[original has
    “Seventeeth”] Century

    Page 35: expressions of an idée[original has “idèe”] fixe

    Page 37: “You keep him here to teach him madness.”[quotation
    mark missing in original]

    Page 55: melancholy of Palador, Prince of Cyprus,[comma missing
    in original]

    Page 57: _King._ When?[original has exclamation point]

    Page 95: “[quotation mark missing in original]Sits on my heart
    so heavy

    Page 143: unregenerate days.[143:1][original has “2”]

    Page 185: References are to the editions named above.[original
    has a comma]

    Page 187: entry “Epicene.”[original has “Epicure.”]

    Page 187: entry “Færie[original has “Faerie”] Queene, The.”

    Page 187, entry “Hamlet.”: 173 ff.,[comma missing in original]
    180, 181

    Page 188, entry “Philaster.”: 5, 19, 129,[original has a
    semi-colon] 131 ff., 138, 139.

    [14:2] Act[original has extraneous period] iii. Sc. iv.

    [11:5] Ibid.,[original has two commas], iii., 5, 31.

    [74:4] Ibid., v., 3,[original has “.,”] 272-4.

    [77:2] Ibid., iv.,[comma missing in original] 5, 23, etc.

    [111:1] Ibid., iv.,[comma missing in original] 3.

    [141:3] “Merchant of Venice,” iv., 1, 114[original has
    “1-114”], etc.

    [144:1] “Merchant of Venice,” i., 1, 91-2[original has “1-91,
    2”].

    [151:1] may also be noticed, though[original has “thought”] it
    is

    [159:2] Ibid., iii., 4, 101-2.[period missing in original]

    [174:1] “Hamlet,[comma missing in original]” ii., 1, 78, etc.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ELIZABETHAN DRAMA AND ITS MAD FOLK***


******* This file should be named 63896-0.txt or 63896-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/6/3/8/9/63896


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org 

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary 
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Giants Return, by Robert Abernathy

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this ebook.

Title: The Giants Return

Author: Robert Abernathy

Release Date: November 27, 2020 [EBook #63899]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GIANTS RETURN ***




                           THE GIANTS RETURN

                          By ROBERT ABERNATHY

               Earth set itself grimly to meet them with
               corrosive fire, determined to blast them
             back to the stars. But they erred in thinking
                the Old Ones were too big to be clever.

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                       Planet Stories Fall 1949.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


In the last hours the star ahead had grown brighter by many magnitudes,
and had changed its color from a dazzling blue through white to the
normal yellow, of a GO sun. That was the Doppler effect as the star's
radial velocity changed relative to the _Quest III_, as for forty hours
the ship had decelerated.

They had seen many such stars come near out of the galaxy's glittering
backdrop, and had seen them dwindle, turn red and go out as the _Quest
III_ drove on its way once more, lashed by despair toward the speed of
light, leaving behind the mockery of yet another solitary and lifeless
luminary unaccompanied by worlds where men might dwell. They had grown
sated with the sight of wonders--of multiple systems of giant stars, of
nebulae that sprawled in empty flame across light years.

But now unwonted excitement possessed the hundred-odd members of the
_Quest III's_ crew. It was a subdued excitement; men and women, they
came and stood quietly gazing into the big vision screens that showed
the oncoming star, and there were wide-eyed children who had been born
in the ship and had never seen a planet. The grownups talked in low
voices, in tones of mingled eagerness and apprehension, of what might
lie at the long journey's end. For the _Quest III_ was coming home; the
sun ahead was _the_ Sun, whose rays had warmed their lives' beginning.

       *       *       *       *       *

Knof Llud, the _Quest III's_ captain, came slowly down the narrow
stair from the observatory, into the big rotunda that was now the main
recreation room, where most of the people gathered. The great chamber,
a full cross-section of the vessel, had been at first a fuel hold. At
the voyage's beginning eighty per cent of the fifteen-hundred-foot
cylinder had been engines and fuel; but as the immense stores were
spent and the holds became radioactively safe, the crew had spread
out from its original cramped quarters. Now the interstellar ship was
little more than a hollow shell.

Eyes lifted from the vision screens to interrogate Knof Llud; he met
them with an impassive countenance, and announced quietly, "We've
sighted Earth."

A feverish buzz arose; the captain gestured for silence and went on,
"It is still only a featureless disk to the telescope. Zost Relyul has
identified it--no more."

But this time the clamor was not to be settled. People pressed round
the screens, peering into them as if with the naked eye they could
pick out the atom of reflected light that was Earth, home. They wrung
each other's hands, kissed, shouted, wept. For the present their fears
were forgotten and exaltation prevailed.

Knof Llud smiled wryly. The rest of the little speech he had been about
to make didn't matter anyway, and it might have spoiled this moment.

He turned to go, and was halted by the sight of his wife, standing at
his elbow. His wry smile took on warmth; he asked, "How do _you_ feel,
Lesra?"

She drew an uncertain breath and released it in a faint sigh. "I don't
know. It's good that Earth's still there." She was thinking, he judged
shrewdly, of Knof Jr. and Delza, who save from pictures could not
remember sunlit skies or grassy fields or woods in summer....

He said, with a touch of tolerant amusement, "What did you think might
have happened to Earth? After all, it's only been nine hundred years."

"That's just it," said Lesra shakily. "Nine hundred years have gone
by--_there_--and nothing will be the same. It won't be the same world
we left, the world we knew and fitted in...."

The captain put an arm round her with comforting pressure. "Don't
worry. Things may have changed--but we'll manage." But his face had
hardened against registering the gnawing of that same doubtful fear
within him. He let his arm fall. "I'd better get up to the bridge.
There's a new course to be set now--for Earth."

He left her and began to climb the stairway again. Someone switched
off the lights, and a charmed whisper ran through the big room as the
people saw each other's faces by the pale golden light of Earth's own
Sun, mirrored and multiplied by the screens. In that light Lesra's eyes
gleamed with unshed tears.

Captain Llud found Navigator Gwar Den looking as smug as the cat
that ate the canary. Gwar Den was finding that the actual observed
positions of the planets thus far located agreed quite closely with
his extrapolations from long unused charts of the Solar System. He had
already set up on the calculator a course that would carry them to
Earth.

Llud nodded curt approval, remarking, "Probably we'll be intercepted
before we get that far."

Den was jolted out of his happy abstraction. "Uh, Captain," he said
hesitantly. "What kind of a reception do you suppose we'll get?"

Llud shook his head slowly. "Who knows? We don't know whether any
of the other _Quests_ returned successful, or if they returned at
all. And we don't know what changes have taken place on Earth. It's
possible--not likely, though--that something has happened to break
civilization's continuity to the point where our expedition has been
forgotten altogether."

       *       *       *       *       *

He turned away grim-lipped and left the bridge. From his private
office-cabin, he sent a message to Chief Astronomer Zost Relyul to
notify him as soon as Earth's surface features became clear; then he
sat idle, alone with his thoughts.

The ship's automatic mechanisms had scant need of tending; Knof Llud
found himself wishing that he could find some back-breaking task for
everyone on board, himself included, to fill up the hours that remained.

There was an extensive and well-chosen film library in the cabin, but
he couldn't persuade himself to kill time that way. He could go down
and watch the screens, or to the family apartment where he might find
Lesra and the children--but somehow he didn't want to do that either.

He felt empty, drained--like his ship. As the _Quest III's_ fuel stores
and the hope of success in man's mightiest venture had dwindled, so the
strength had gone out of him. Now the last fuel compartment was almost
empty and Captain Knof Llud felt tired and old.

Perhaps, he thought, he was feeling the weight of his nine hundred
Earth years--though physically he was only forty now, ten years older
than when the voyage had begun. That was the foreshortening along the
time axis of a space ship approaching the speed of light. Weeks and
months had passed for the _Quest III_ in interstellar flight while
years and decades had raced by on the home world.

Bemusedly Llud got to his feet and stood surveying a cabinet with
built-in voice recorder and pigeonholes for records. There were about
three dozen film spools there--his personal memoirs of the great
expedition, a segment of his life and of history. He might add that to
the ship's official log and its collections of scientific data, as a
report to whatever powers might be on Earth now--if such powers were
still interested.

Llud selected a spool from among the earliest. It was one he had made
shortly after leaving Procyon, end of the first leg of the trip. He
slid it onto the reproducer.

His own voice came from the speaker, fresher, more vibrant and
confident than he knew it was now.

"One light-day out from Procyon, the thirty-third day by ship's time
since leaving Earth.

"Our visit to Procyon drew a blank. There is only one huge planet, twice
the size of Jupiter, and like Jupiter utterly unfit to support a colony.

"Our hopes were dashed--and I think all of us, even remembering the
Centaurus Expedition's failure, hoped more than we cared to admit. If
Procyon had possessed a habitable planet, we could have returned after
an absence of not much over twenty years Earth time.

"It is cheering to note that the crew seems only more resolute. We go
on to Capella; its spectrum, so like our own Sun's, beckons. If success
comes there, a century will have passed before we can return to Earth;
friends, relatives, all the generation that launched the _Quest_ ships
will be long since dead. Nevertheless we go on. Our generation's dream,
humanity's dream, lives in us and in the ship forever...."

Presently Knof Llud switched off that younger voice of his and leaned
back, an ironic smile touching his lips. That fervent idealism seemed
remote and foreign to him now. The fanfares of departure must still
have been ringing in his ears.

He rose, slipped the record back in its niche and picked out another,
later, one.

"One week since we passed close enough to Aldebaran to ascertain that
that system, too, is devoid of planets.

"We face the unpleasant realization that what was feared is probably
true--that worlds such as the Sun's are a rare accident, and that we
may complete our search without finding even one new Earth.

"It makes no difference, of course; we cannot betray the plan....
This may be man's last chance of escaping his pitiful limitation to
one world in all the Universe. Certainly the building of this ship
and its two sisters, the immense expenditure of time and labor and
energy stores that went into them, left Earth's economy drained and
exhausted. Only once in a long age does mankind rise to such a selfless
and transcendent effort--the effort of Egypt that built the pyramids,
or the war efforts of the nations in the last great conflicts of the
twentieth century.

"Looked at historically, such super-human outbursts of energy are
the result of a population's outgrowing its room and resources, and
therefore signalize the beginning of the end. Population can be
limited, but the price is a deadly frustration, because growth alone is
life.... In our day the end of man's room for growth on the Earth was
in sight--so we launched the _Quests_. Perhaps our effort will prove as
futile as pyramid-building, less practical than orgies of slaughter to
reduce pressure.... In any case, it would be impossible to transport
very many people to other stars; but Earth could at least go into
its decline with the knowledge that its race went onward and upward,
expanding limitlessly into the Universe....

"Hopeless, unless we find planets!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Knof Llud shook his head sorrowfully and took off the spool. That
was from the time when he had grown philosophical after the first
disappointments.

He frowned thoughtfully, choosing one more spool that was only four
years old. The recorded voice sounded weary, yet alive with a strange
longing....

"We are in the heart of Pleiades; a hundred stars show brilliant on
the screens, each star encircled by a misty halo like lights glowing
through fog, for we are traversing a vast diffuse nebula.

"According to plan, the _Quest III_ has reached its furthest point from
Earth. Now we turn back along a curve that will take us past many more
stars and stellar systems--but hope is small that any of those will
prove a home for man, as have none of the thousands of stars examined
already.

"But what are a few thousand stars in a galaxy of billions? We have
only, as it were, visited a handful of the outlying villages of the
Universe, while the lights of its great cities still blaze far ahead
along the Milky Way.

"On flimsy excuses I have had Zost Relyul make observations of the
globular cluster Omega Centauri. There are a hundred thousand stars
there in a volume of space where one finds a few dozen in the Sun's
neighborhood; there if anywhere must circle the planets we seek! But
Omega Centauri is twenty thousand light years away....

"Even so--by expending its remaining fuel freely, the _Quest III_ could
achieve a velocity that would take us there without dying of senility
of aging too greatly. It would be a one-way journey--even if enough
fuel remained, there would be little point in returning to Earth after
more than forty thousand years. By then our civilization certainly, and
perhaps the human race itself, would have perished from memory.

"That was why the planners limited our voyage, and those of the other
_Quests_, to less than a thousand years Earth time. Even now, according
to the sociodynamic predictions made then, our civilization--if the
other expeditions failed also--will have reached a dangerously unstable
phase, and before we can get back it may have collapsed completely from
overpopulation.

"Why go back, then with the news of our failure? Why not forget about
Earth and go on to Omega Centauri? What use is quixotic loyalty to a
decree five thousand years old, whose makers are dead and which may be
forgotten back there?

"Would the crew be willing? I don't know--some of them still show signs
of homesickness, though they know with their minds that everything that
was once 'home' has probably been swept away....

"It doesn't matter. Today I gave orders to swing the ship."

Savagely Knof Llud stabbed the button that shut off the speaker. Then
he sat for a time with head resting in his hands, staring into nothing.

The memory of that fierce impulse to go on still had power to shake
him. A couple of lines of poetry came into his head, as he read them
once in translation from the ancient English....

          ... for my purpose holds
    To sail beyond the sunset, and the baths
    Of all the western stars, until I die.

       *       *       *       *       *

Llud sighed. He still couldn't say just why he had given the order to
turn back. The stars had claimed his heart--but he was still a part of
Earth, and not even nine hundred years of space and time had been able
to alter that.

He wondered if there would still be a quiet stream and a green
shady place beside it where a death-weary man, relieved at last of
responsibility, could rest and dream no more.... Those things went
on, if men didn't change them. And a pine forest where he and young
Knof could go camping, and lie on their backs at night and gaze at the
glittering constellations, far away, out of reach.... He wasn't sure he
would want to do that, though.

Suddenly a faint cushioned jar went through the great ship; it seemed
to falter one moment in flight.

       *       *       *       *       *

The captain was on his feet instantly, but then his movements became
unhurried. Whatever it had been was past, and he had a good idea
what it had been--a meteoroid, nothing unusual in the vicinity of
the Sun, though in interstellar space and around planetless stars
such collisions were rare to the vanishing point. No harm could have
been done. The _Quest III's_ collision armor was nonmaterial and for
practical purposes invulnerable.

Just as he took his finger off the button that opened the door, the
intercommunication phone shrilled imperatively. Knof Llud wheeled,
frowning--surely a meteoroid impact wasn't that serious. Coincidence,
maybe--it might be Zost Relyul calling as instructed.

He reached the phone at the moment when another, heavier jolt shook
the vessel. Llud snatched up the receiver with the speed of a scalded
cat.

"Captain?" It was Gwar Den's voice, stammering a little. "Captain,
we're being attacked!"

"Sound the alarm. Emergency stations." He had said it automatically,
then felt a curious detached relief at the knowledge that after all
these years he could still respond quickly and smoothly to a crisis.
There was a moment's silence, and he heard the alarm start--three
short buzzes and repeat, ringing through all the great length of the
interstellar ship. Knowing that Gwar Den was still there, he said,
"Now--attacked by what?"

"Ships," said Gwar Den helplessly. "Five of them so far. No, there's a
sixth now." Repeated blows quivered the _Quest III's_ framework. The
navigator said, obviously striving for calm, "They're light craft, not
fifty feet long, but they move fast. The detectors hardly had time to
show them before they opened up. Can't get a telescope beam on them
long enough to tell much."

"If they're that small," said Knof Llud deliberately, "they can't carry
anything heavy enough to hurt us. Hold to course. I'll be right up."

In the open doorway he almost fell over his son. Young Knof's eyes were
big; he had heard his father's words.

"Something's happened," he judged with deadly twelve-year-old
seriousness and, without wasting time on questions, "Can I go with you,
huh, Dad?"

Llud hesitated, said, "All right. Come along and keep out of the way."
He headed for the bridge with strides that the boy could not match.

There were people running in the corridors, heading for their posts.
Their faces were set, scared, uncomprehending. The _Quest III_
shuddered, again and again, under blows that must have had millions
of horsepower behind them; but it plunged on toward Earth, its mighty
engines still steadily braking its interstellar velocity.

To a man, the ship's responsible officers were already on the bridge,
most of them breathless. To a man they looked appeal at Captain Knof
Llud.

"Well?" he snapped. "What are they doing?"

Gwar Den spoke. "There are thirteen of them out there now, sir, and
they're all banging away at us."

The captain stared into the black star-strewn depths of a vision screen
where occasional blue points of light winked ominously, never twice
from the same position.

Knof Jr. flattened himself against the metal wall and watched silently.
His young face was less anxious than his elders'; he had confidence in
his father.

"If they had anything heavier," surmised the captain, "they'd have
unlimbered it by now. They're out to get us. But at this rate, they
can't touch us as long as our power lasts--or until they bring up some
bigger stuff."

       *       *       *       *       *

The mild shocks went on--whether from projectiles or energy-charges,
would be hard to find out and it didn't matter; whatever was hitting
the _Quest III's_ shell was doing it at velocities where the
distinction between matter and radiation practically ceases to exist.

But that shell was tough. It was an extension of the gravitic drive
field which transmitted the engines' power equally to every atom of
the ship; forces impinging on the outside of the field were similarly
transmitted and rendered harmless. The effect was as if the vessel and
all space inside its field were a single perfectly elastic body. A
meteoroid, for example, on striking it rebounded--usually vaporized by
the impact--and the ship, in obedience to the law of equal and opposite
forces, rebounded too, but since its mass was so much greater, its
deflection was negligible.

The people in the _Quest III_ would have felt nothing at all of
the vicious onslaught being hurled against them, save that their
inertialess drive, at its normal thrust of two hundred gravities,
was intentionally operated at one half of one per cent efficiency to
provide the illusion of Earthly gravitation.

One of the officers said shakily, "It's as if they've been lying in
wait for us. But why on Earth--"

"That," said the captain grimly, "is what we have to find out. Why--on
Earth. At least, I suspect the answer's there."

The _Quest III_ bored steadily on through space, decelerating. Even if
one were no fatalist, there seemed no reason to stop decelerating or
change course. There was nowhere else to go and too little fuel left
if there had been; come what might, this was journey's end--perhaps
in a more violent and final way than had been anticipated. All around
wheeled the pigmy enemies, circling, maneuvering, and attacking,
always attacking, with the senseless fury of maddened hornets. The
interstellar ship bore no offensive weapons--but suddenly on one of the
vision screens a speck of light flared into nova-brilliance, dazzling
the watchers for the brief moment in which its very atoms were torn
apart.

Knof Jr. whooped ecstatically and then subsided warily, but no one was
paying attention to him. The men on the _Quest III's_ bridge looked
questions at each other, as the thought of help from outside flashed
into many minds at once. But Captain Llud said soberly, "It must have
caught one of their own shots, reflected. Maybe its own, if it scored
too direct a hit."

He studied the data so far gathered. A few blurred pictures had been
got, which showed cylindrical space ships much like the _Quest III_,
except that they were rocket-propelled and of far lesser size. Their
size was hard to ascertain, because you needed to know their distance
and speed--but detector-beam echoes gave the distance, and likewise, by
the Doppler method, the velocity of directly receding or approaching
ships. It was apparent that the enemy vessels were even smaller than
Gwar Den had at first supposed--not large enough to hold even one man.
Tiny, deadly hornets with a colossal sting.

"Robot craft, no doubt," said Knof Llud, but a chill ran down his spine
as it occurred to him that perhaps the attackers weren't of human
origin. They had seen no recognizable life in the part of the galaxy
they had explored, but one of the other _Quests_ might have encountered
and been traced home by some unhuman race that was greedy and able to
conquer.

       *       *       *       *       *

It became evident, too, that the bombardment was being kept up by a
constant arrival of fresh attackers, while others raced away into
space, presumably returning to base to replenish their ammunition. That
argued a planned and prepared interception with virulent hatred behind
it.

Elsuz Llug, the gravitic engineer, calculated dismally, "At the rate
we're having to shed energy, the fuel will be gone in six or eight
hours."

"We'll have reached Earth before then," Gwar Den said hopefully.

"If they don't bring out the heavy artillery first."

"We're under the psychological disadvantage," said the captain, "of not
knowing why we're being attacked."

Knof Jr. burst out, spluttering slightly with the violence of a
thought too important to suppress, "But we're under a ps-psychological
advantage, too!"

His father raised an eyebrow. "What's that? I don't seem to have
noticed it."

"They're mad and we aren't, yet," said the boy. Then, seeing that he
hadn't made himself clear, "In a fight, if a guy gets mad he starts
swinging wild and then you nail him."

Smiles splintered the ice of tension. Captain Llud said, "Maybe you've
got something there. They seem to be mad, all right. But we're not in
a position to throw any punches." He turned back to the others. "As I
was going to say--I think we'd better try to parley with the enemy. At
least we may find out who he is and why he's determined to smash us."

And now instead of tight-beam detectors the ship was broadcasting on an
audio carrier wave that shifted through a wide range of frequencies,
repeating on each the same brief recorded message:

"Who are you? What do you want? We are the interstellar expedition
_Quest III_...." And so on, identifying themselves and protesting that
they were unarmed and peaceful, that there must be some mistake, and
querying again, "Who are _you_?"

There was no answer. The ship drove on, its fuel trickling away under
multiplied demands. Those outside were squandering vastly greater
amounts of energy in the effort to batter down its defenses, but
converting that energy into harmless gravitic impulses was costing the
_Quest III_ too. Once more Knof Llud had the insidious sense of his own
nerves and muscles and will weakening along with the power-sinews of
his ship.

Zost Relyul approached him apologetically. "If you have time,
Captain--I've got some data on Earth now."

Eagerly Llud took the sheaf of photographs made with the telescope. But
they told him nothing; only the continental outlines were clear, and
those were as they had been nine hundred years ago.... He looked up
inquiringly at Zost Relyul.

"There are some strange features," said the astronomer carefully.
"First of all--there are no lights on the night side. And on the
daylight face, our highest magnification should already reveal traces
of cities, canals, and the like--but it does not.

"The prevailing color of the land masses, you see, is the normal
green vegetation. But the diffraction spectrum is queer. It indicates
reflecting surfaces less than one-tenth millimeter wide--so the
vegetation there can't be trees or grass, but must be more like a fine
moss or even a coarse mold."

"Is that all?" demanded Llud.

"Isn't it enough?" said Zost Relyul blankly. "Well--we tried
photography by invisible light, of course. The infra-red shows nothing
and likewise the ultraviolet up to the point where the atmosphere is
opaque to it."

The captain sighed wearily. "Good work," he said. "Keep it up; perhaps
you can answer some of these riddles before--"

"_We know who you are_," interrupted a harshly crackling voice with a
strange accent, "_and pleading will do you no good._"

       *       *       *       *       *

Knof Llud whirled to the radio apparatus, his weariness dropping from
him once more. He snapped, "But who are you?" and the words blended
absurdly with the same words in his own voice on the still repeating
tape.

He snapped off the record; as he did so the speaker, still crackling
with space static, said, "It may interest you to know that you are the
last. The two other interstellar expeditions that went out have already
returned and been destroyed, as you will soon be--the sooner, if you
continue toward Earth."

Knof Llud's mind was clicking again. The voice--which must be coming
from Earth, relayed by one of the midget ships--was not very smart; it
had already involuntarily told him a couple of things--that it was not
as sure of itself as it sounded he deduced from the fact it had deigned
to speak at all, and from its last remark he gathered that the _Quest
III's_ ponderous and unswerving progress toward Earth had somehow
frightened it. So it was trying to frighten them.

He shoved those facts back for future use. Just now he had to know
something, so vitally that he asked it as a bald question, "_Are you
human?_"

The voice chuckled sourly. "We are human," it answered, "but you are
not."

The captain was momentarily silent, groping for an adequate reply.
Behind him somebody made a choked noise, the only sound in the stunned
hush, and the ship jarred slightly as a thunderbolt slammed vengefully
into its field.

"Suppose we settle this argument about humanity," said Knof Llud
woodenly. He named a vision frequency.

"Very well." The tone was like a shrug. The voice went on in its
language that was quite intelligible, but alien-sounding with the
changes that nine hundred years had wrought. "Perhaps, if you realize
your position, you will follow the intelligent example of the _Quest
I's_ commander."

Knof Llud stiffened. The _Quest I_, launched toward Arcturus and the
star cloud called Berenice's Hair, had been after the _Quest III_ the
most hopeful of the expeditions--and its captain had been a good friend
of Llud's, nine hundred years ago.... He growled, "What happened to
him?"

"He fought off our interceptors, which are around you now, for some
time," said the voice lightly. "When he saw that it was hopeless, he
preferred suicide to defeat, and took his ship into the Sun." A short
pause. "The vision connection is ready."

Knof Llud switched on the screen at the named wavelength, and a
picture formed there. The face and figure that appeared were ugly,
but undeniably a man's. His features and his light-brown skin showed
the same racial characteristics possessed by those aboard the _Quest
III_, but he had an elusive look of deformity. Most obviously, his head
seemed too big for his body, and his eyes in turn too big for his head.

He grinned nastily at Knof Llud. "Have you any other last wishes?"

"Yes," said Llud with icy control. "You haven't answered one question.
Why do you want to kill us? You can see we're as human as you are."

The big-headed man eyed him with a speculative look in his great
eyes, behind which the captain glimpsed the flickering raw fire of a
poisonous hatred.

"It is enough for you to know that you must die."

[Illustration: "_It is enough for you to know that you must die._"]

       *       *       *       *       *

Llud frowned darkly--then an incredible light burst in his brain.
He stared at the pictured figure with quite new and indescribable
sensations. "You," he said slowly, "are not on Earth, as I was
assuming; if you were, there'd be a time lag of quite a few minutes
in this conversation. You must be on one of those miniature ships out
there--which aren't big enough to hold a man!"

He saw the uncanny hate flare closer to the surface this time.

"You are clever," said the big-headed man spitefully. "Very well,
then--in your screen you see some of the differences between me, who am
human, and you, who are not any more. The main difference, which you do
not see, is that I am three point sixty-two millimeters high, and you
are more like two meters."

Knof Llud was speechless. The man who had just said he was an eighth
of an inch tall grinned unpleasantly again at his amazement. "Yes," he
said. "I am one of the New Humanity, which has replaced your kind on
the Earth. You are the last of the old, subhuman race of giants, which
will very shortly be extinct."

"It's impossible," whispered Llud. But he had to remember that he had
been on the verge of deducing the thing himself.

The little man folded his arms and gazed at him with mocking
superiority. "You have the mentality of nine hundred years ago. Your
age would have called size reduction impossible, even though they
already had most of the biophysical and genetic knowledge needed. They
suffered from increasing overpopulation, but they were blind to the
obvious answer--so Earth went through the wasteful folly of launching
the interstellar ships. We are descended from dull-witted giants like
you."

Cautiously, out of sight of the screen, Llud extended a hand and found
a pad of memo blanks and a pencil. Without taking his eyes off the
magnified, bragging image, he began to write. He thought he had the
answer now to this murderous welcome.

"_We_ have found the solution of the problem of growth," the image was
saying. "For seven hundred years now, each generation has been smaller
than the one before, so that there is constantly more room on the
planet, relatively speaking; and the process still goes on. There are
six hundred trillion of us on Earth now. In another two generations
there will be a quadrillion human beings only two millimeters tall--and
no overcrowding.

"But," the little man snarled venomously, "we have no room for you
giants!"

Knof Llud sighed. The sagging lines of his face were calculated to
reassure the other and his superiors on Earth, to whom the sight-sound
conversation was undoubtedly being relayed. Llud said tiredly, "But
you don't have any reason for destroying us. Why not let us land on
one of the worthless outer planets, and make an attempt to live there?
Or, if you will give us a little atomic fuel, we will leave the Solar
System again and trouble you no more. In exchange we have a great deal
of knowledge, data on the stars of the Taurus Cluster and beyond, to
offer...."

       *       *       *       *       *

As he spoke, he was beckoning Gwar Den to him, handing the navigator
the brief order he had scrawled on the pad.

The little man laughed shortly. "As if we could trust you--or wanted
your worthless knowledge of stars! No, we will not bargain with giants."

The captain said slowly, for there was still time to be gained in order
that the gamble he had decided on might have its chance, "You're very
sure that you _can_ smash us. Remember, we control gravitic forces, a
science you have evidently lost."

He saw the look of sneering triumph waver a little; then the image
snapped, "We destroyed the others. Your screen, whatever it is, is not
impenetrable; we have power to break through it."

That was true, of course. The drive-field would collapse when the fuel
ran out, desperately soon now.

Llud started to speak again; then he felt the nearly imperceptible
lurch that meant the _Quest III_ had applied a terrific acceleration at
an angle to its line of flight. Gwar Den had done a quick job.

The impacts of enemy fire ceased; the ship's abrupt swerve had
temporarily shaken off its rocket-driven tormentors.

Almost simultaneously the image on the screen looked startled. The
man turned as if listening to some one else. "So you've begun a
frantic attempt to dodge. It won't help you--" His jaw dropped and
he listened again; this time he was a little longer overcoming his
surprise. Knof Llud knew what the second message had been as surely as
if he had been there--that the _Quest III_, far from doubling back, was
still heading for Earth, from a slightly different angle, and was even
accelerating. The side thrust had already ceased. That expenditure of
fuel reduced the chances, but it had to be risked.

The little man faced Knof Llud again and smiled savagely. "Whatever
you're trying, we're ready for you!"

"No doubt," thought the captain with some satisfaction. He sat up
straighter and gazed at the little man. His discouraged air was gone
and the look in his eyes was the distillate of cold, searing scorn. He
said, biting off the words with deliberate emphasis, to that one and
the others who would be listening, "You pitiful pigmies."

The face in the screen grew darker with rage; it opened its mouth and
closed it with a snap.

"You pitiful pigmies," repeated Knof Llud. "You're pigmies not only in
physical size, but in everything else. You've thrown away everything
that made being human worthwhile, all for the sake of your one pigmy
ambition--to multiply your crawling little lives and become more and
more at the same time that you become less and less. You've shrunk into
vermin. In the end you'll probably shrink away to nothing, and good
riddance."

With sudden change of pace he shot out a question: "What's the longest
wave length of visible light?"

"2100 angstroms," the answer was mechanical. Then, "You--"

The captain smiled a smile of weary disdain. "I thought so. Six
hundred trillion of you, eh? Crawling around down there in the dark,
because you see in the far ultraviolet--and the atmosphere stops those
frequencies. You can't see the stars! For thousands of years men
watched the stars and wanted them and were kept trying by sight of
them--but you can't see the stars any more."

The face stared at him with great eyes full of unspeakable hate, and
spat a word which had not been in the language when the _Quest III_ was
launched. The screen went suddenly blank.

       *       *       *       *       *

Knof Llud turned away, and his eyes fell on another vision screen.
Earth was clear in it, dead ahead, a disk so near that land and sea
were distinguishable with the naked eye, and coming rapidly nearer. The
sight cost him a moment's nostalgic pain; then he thought of the little
men, swarming ant-like over every square foot of habitable land....
Vermin he had called them; vermin they were.

He found himself, for no sensible reason, counting seconds. He had
got to seventeen when the screen that showed Earth dissolved into a
featureless and blinding glare.

At the same instant a force too tremendous for the senses to register
smote the _Quest III_. The interior of the ship, everything and
everyone in it seemed to stretch and distort like rubber as the
gravitic field was strained beyond its elastic limit. The lights went
out as the drive units claimed the last erg of available energy and
shrieked their overloaded protest through the crushing and twisted
darkness.

But then the lights went on again and the ship was hurtling free in
space. Its people picked themselves up dazedly and tried to understand
why they were still alive.

"Gee, Dad," young Knof said admiringly as he dabbed at a blackening
eye, "what did you do?"

"_I_ didn't do much," said the captain. "The fireworks were from our
little friends. I just took your advice about getting the other fellow
mad, and it worked. They just shut their eyes and swung with everything
they had."

The boy gazed at the vision screen where the Sun was already a star
again. He whistled. "They had plenty."

"I thought the heavy artillery must be ready on Earth in case we kept
going that way. It was--enough of it to knock us right out of the
System at close to the speed of light. Just how close I don't know
yet ... ah." He took a couple of sheets of figures from the hands of
Gwar Den, and devoured them rapidly. He nodded with satisfaction to the
anxious faces around. "We must have been hit simultaneously by fire
from all over one hemisphere--and the forces' resultant, which is now
our course, came out as I had hoped.... Our velocity is close enough;
the journey will take about fourteen years, ship's time, but most of us
can expect to live that long--"

"Where are we going?" demanded Knof Jr., unable to contain his
curiosity.

Captain Knof Llud smiled down at his son with a touch of wistfulness.
The memory of Earth, dwindling into infinite smallness behind, still
hurt him; but young Knof would never know that hurt. And, after
fourteen years, the captain would be about ready to leave his dream in
younger hands.... He laid an arm about the boy's shoulders and pointed
silently to the forward vision screen, to a faint blurred light dead in
its center.

"Omega Centauri," he said, and there was a new confidence in his voice.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GIANTS RETURN ***

***** This file should be named 63899-0.txt or 63899-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
    http://www.gutenberg.org/6/3/8/9/63899/

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org 

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary 
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg EBook of Women, Children, Love, and Marriage, by 
Catherine Gasquoine Hartley

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Women, Children, Love, and Marriage

Author: Catherine Gasquoine Hartley

Release Date: November 27, 2020 [EBook #63898]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WOMEN, CHILDREN, LOVE, MARRIAGE ***




Produced by Turgut Dincer and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)







  WOMEN, CHILDREN, LOVE AND MARRIAGE




  WOMEN, CHILDREN,
  LOVE and MARRIAGE

  BY
  C. GASQUOINE HARTLEY

  AUTHOR OF “THE TRUTH ABOUT WOMAN,” “WOMEN’S WILD OATS,”
  “MOTHER AND SON,” ETC.

  [Illustration]

  LONDON
  HEATH CRANTON, LIMITED
  6 FLEET LANE E.C.4
  1924

  _Printed in Great Britain for Heath Cranton, Ltd., by Clements Bros.,
      Chatham_

  And we won’t, we simply _will not_ face the world as we’ve made it,
  and our own souls as we find them, and take the responsibility. We’ll
  never get anywhere till we stand up man to man and face _everything_
  out, and break the old forms, but never let our pride and courage of
  life be broken.

                                    D. H. LAURENCE in “Aaron’s Rod.”




CONTENTS

                                                                  PAGE

  Foreword                                                          11


  SECTION I.—WOMEN                                                  13

  1. Women and Cats                                                 15

  2. The Women of Spain                                             19

  3. The Dangerous Age                                              29

  4. The Legal Position of the Mother                               35

  5. Problems of Birth Control                                      37


  SECTION II.—CHILDREN                                              41

  1. A Boy’s Misery                                                 43

  2. Criminals Made in Our Nurseries                                49

  3. The Tyranny of Parents                                         51

  4. The Superfluous Father                                         55

  5. The Perfect Mother                                             59

  6. Nobody’s Children                                              61

  7. Let Us Pension the Mothers                                     71

  8. Boy and Girl Offenders and Adult Misunderstanding              73

  9. New Ways of Teaching Children                                  79

  10. Difficulties and Mistakes in Sex Education                    87

  11. Sex Instruction. The Age at which Knowledge Should
        be given                                                   107

  12. The Myth of the Virtuous Sex                                 113

  13. Sentimental Tampering with Difficult Problems
        with some Remarks on Sex Favouritism                       117

  14. The Seduction of Men                                         123

  15. Playing with Love                                            127


  SECTION III.—MARRIAGE AND OTHER RELATIONSHIPS                    131

  1. Is Passionate Love the Surest Foundation for
       Marriage?                                                   133

  2. Marriage Reform                                               139

  3. To-day’s Ideas on Marriage. Are we seeking
       vainly after happiness?                                     141

  4. Why Men are Unfaithful                                        145

  5. Why Wives are Unfaithful                                      149

  6. Should Doctors Tell?                                          157

  7. The Modern Wife and the Old-fashioned Husband                 161

  8. The Temporary Gentleman and his Young Wife                    165

  9. Is Marriage Too Easy?                                         169

  10. Passionate Friendships                                       173

  11. Conclusion—Regeneration                                      187

  INDEX                                                            189




FOREWORD


The essays here collected were written on various occasions over a
considerable space of time. This will account for the diversity in the
subjects and for a certain amount of restatement of my own beliefs and
position.

I have not thought it advisable to attempt to alter this, since though
some of the things I have said before may be repeated, the point of
view and special application are in each case different.

Some of the essays have appeared already in various journals, but all
have been very carefully revised and altered and the great majority
entirely re-written.

In spite of the diversity of the subjects there is a common idea
beneath all the essays—a common back-ground of faith. I do not know
whether I am justified in my confidence that this idea—this faith is
abundantly manifest. If I should try to formulate it into one short
statement, I should say it was the responsibility that the old have to
the young—the debt that one generation owes to the next.

In my gospel there is one commandment which may not be broken: _Ye
shall not hurt a little child._

                                             C. GASQUOINE HARTLEY.

  MERTON PARK,
  _March, 1924_.




SECTION I

WOMEN




WOMEN AND CATS


In an admirable speech that I heard a few weeks ago, women were likened
to cats. I do not remember exactly in what connection, however this
does not matter.

But this remark set me thinking—it was not the first time, by many,
that I had heard a man sum up the evil characteristics possessed, or
supposed to be possessed, by my sex by likening us to cats. I now asked
myself was this true? I want to be frank. Let me confess at once that I
have come to the conclusion that the speaker was right. Women and cats
have many qualities in common. I have another confession to make. When
I first thought of this question of women and cats, I am bound to say
that I felt that I did not like either cats or women, in fact I was not
sure that I didn’t dislike them.

But wait, please, my sisters, before you let your anger fall upon me.
This knowledge was so wounding to my self-pride that it forced me
into an inquiry. I had made a fatal mistake. I soon found the reason
of my dislike. I had been thinking of women and cats as a class and
not as individuals. I disliked them just as one dislikes the Chinese,
Portuguese, pigs or almost any other class of beings thought of
collectively. Of course this is absurd, but then nine times out of
every ten we are absurd—or unreasonable, which is the same thing, and
only by recognising this can we find the truth. Who is there who has
never admired some individual cat? Is there any misogynist who has
never loved some individual woman?

Before I come to the real subject of this woman—cat likeness, I would
like to say that we women are a little tired of being classed _en
masse_. We really are growing wearied of hearing about ourselves. We
claim to be appraised as individuals, some good, some bad, most of us a
compound of good qualities and bad, but not all alike, not collective.
We object to this communion of character. I remember talking to a
Frenchman about Englishwomen. He said, “By the ones and the twos you
are charmantes, très charmantes, but altogether—no—horrible!” This male
logic is ridiculous. Men revile us as a class and sell their bodies and
souls to us as individuals.

Now let us look further—What are the class-cat qualities that are also
the class-woman qualities?

Few subjects are at once so easy and so difficult to approach as this
one of woman and also of cat—our tiny, intimate tiger. We may purr
commonplaces, or scratch and spit rage, but the illusive individuality
of women and cats escapes description. Yes, the more I consider this
subject of women and cats the more convinced I am that this likeness is
a compliment to my sex. Like Balaam’s ass of old those who set out to
curse us are made to bless.

For a moment I want you to think of a beautiful kitten, of her
brilliant devilry, her perfect curves, the elusive wonder of her
unwinking eyes like orange flowers, the delicate nuances of expression
in her tail. Now, I want you to ask yourselves the nature of your
regard for this perfect animal. You prize her rather for her beauty,
than for her friendship. You call her pet, idiotic names, play with
her, then go away and forget her.

The kitten grows up, becomes a cat, and old. She ceases to interest
you. Her work is now to catch mice—to serve you. Do you think the cat
does not feel this change in her mode of life—this too sudden loss of
joy, which is forced upon her as soon as she attains her maturity.
If you doubt this, make a real friend—not a plaything—of a kitten.
We did this once. The kitten passionately loved my husband; when he
went walking she went part of the distance with him; often she waited
for him, or watched for his return loudly purring a welcome. Then my
husband proved faithless; the kitten grew old and less beautiful, and
we got a dog; he ceased to notice her. That cat died; yes, slowly pined
away from grief. I acknowledge all cats are not so sensitive; they
have not been made friends. The common cat develops an immense power
of ignoring your past passionate and playful petting. She becomes
distantly indifferent, or coquettishly variable—purring at one hour,
scratching at another. She remembers her past; she understands what you
valued in her. All that is herself she keeps for herself.

Contrast the cat with the dog. The blind worship of the one, the
exquisitely calm indifference of the other. The dog accepts you,
whatever treatment you give him, because you have loved him for
himself—made him your companion, your friend. But can you expect this
from the cat? You have never made her your friend; you have not found
it worth while to understand her. She deceives you. She scratches you
with those exquisite velvet paws do you annoy her. You cannot teach
her not to thieve. But why? She has no other weapon, and the great
life force urges her to self-protection. And how splendidly she defends
herself; how persistent and how successful she is in gaining her
desires. And how well she understands the advantages that beauty gives
to her; advantages she can gain from nothing else. There is something
really splendid in the trouble the cat takes over her personal attire;
to keep the seductive whiteness of her shirt front’s pretty fur, the
glossy shine of her splendid tiger skin. The dog would be quite happy
and proud when dirty—ugliness is allowed to him. But the cat!—only when
her self-respect is dead can she neglect to be beautiful.

Yes, now I have come to think about cats, I am filled with adoration.
With every force against her the cat has kept her power! Her rudeness
is sublime! Her aloofness is adorable! You may scratch her chin, she
will permit this if she feels inclined, but the allowing of this
familiarity does not forward your intimacy with her in the least—she
knows what your advances mean. Sometimes she will not respond to your
supplications—you cannot compel her. She wishes to sit upon your lap,
a dozen times you send her down and each time she returns; you want
her to sit upon your lap, and a dozen times she refuses and jumps
down. She imposes her will upon you with a lordship that admits of no
dispute. The personality of the cat is persistent and overwhelming,
she is inconceivably herself. Nothing living—no, not even woman—is so
self-supporting—I do not mean this economically, but artistically,—and
self-centred as the cat. She is the great ego—the supreme type of the
Super-Me.

I have said almost nothing at all about the character of woman. Is it
necessary? I think not.




THE WOMEN OF SPAIN


Wherever I go in Spain, in the streets of the towns, in the churches,
in the work-rooms, I am impressed with the fine types of the women;
their strength and quietness—the same quality which Valeria, the
Spanish novelist, speaks of as “a notable robustness.”

There is a fascination about Spanish women not easy to define. Not all
of them are beautiful, and it is, of course, easy to find women of
all degrees of ugliness, but the proportion of those who are strong
and beautiful seems to me to be very large. There is greater variety
of types in northern than in southern Spain. While there are many
women who are dark, with golden complexions, and quite Arabian eyes, a
proportion of fair women will be found with bright brown, auburn, and
some, even golden hair. One sees rosy complexions and blue eyes that
remind one of England; though mixed grey eyes are more frequent. Many
of the faces have finely modelled features, quite classic in outline.
Certainly the most beautiful and distinguished faces are not found
among the women of the so-called upper classes, but belong to the
fish-girls and market-women of the towns and the peasants of the rural
districts. And this presence of a really fine type among the workers of
a race is a certain indication of an old civilisation.

Many of the women workers in northern Spain are singularly individual.
They are usually tall, and have very distinct features, especially the
nose. It is a face in which every line has character, much strength,
and also humour, rising quickly to the beautiful eyes, but slowly
to the mouth, lengthening it into a smile. They all look like women
whom no man could venture to insult. I do not know whether one must
attribute it to their dress—the vivid coloured handkerchiefs which set
their faces, as it were, in an Oriental frame—but these women have a
serious, passionate look, which is completely fascinating. They are
different from the women of southern Spain, who are smaller, more
graceful, perhaps more piquant, but certainly less beautiful.

Living in Spain, you come to understand that this land is really the
connecting link between Europe and Africa. Both in their physical
traits and in their character, the Spaniards show their relation to the
North African type; seldom, indeed, is a Spaniard entirely a European.
And it is amongst the women that the resemblance stands out most
clearly. There are women with dark long African faces. You will see
them among the _flamencos_ of Seville or in the gipsy quarter of the
Camino del Sacre-Monte at Granada,—women with slow sinuous movements,
which you notice best when you see them dance, and wonderful eyes that
flash a slow fire, quite unforgettable in their strange beauty. In
dress you still find the Oriental love of bright and violent colours.
The elegant Manilla shawls and the mantillas which give such special
distinction to the women of southern Spain, are modifications of the
Eastern veil. The elaborately dressed hair, built up with combs, with
one rose or carnation giving a note of colour, has also a very ancient
origin.

Racial types may nearly always be best studied in the women of a
nation, and this is certainly so in a very old civilisation like
Spain, where many forces have combined to waste the men of the race.
Representing as they do both on the physical and psychic side a
conservative tendency, and with a lower variational aptitude than men,
women preserve more markedly primitive racial elements of character.
This may possibly explain why the women of Spain, on the whole, are
finer than the men.

How well I recall these women as I have seen them often, gathered for
the morning markets in the towns; chaffering, laughing, and carrying
on their work in the conversational Spanish manner. Here is commercial
activity united with a picturesque beauty, unspoilt by the usual
ugliness of business. Ugliness is not a necessary growth of progress.
There is terrible poverty in Spain. The peasants in the country and
the labourers in the towns suffer much injustice in too heavy rents
and an unfair burden of taxation. But as I have come to know them,
I have realised that the sum of their poverty is, after all, so much
less than the sum of their knowledge of the art of living. Not their
poverty, but their splendid capacity for eluding its misery, is what is
so remarkable. These workers have colour not only in their dresses, but
in their souls.

I see again a charming scene that I chanced upon one day in the
beautiful town of Vigo, which is situated in Galicia, in the extreme
north-west, and is one of the seaports by which the stranger enters
Spain. The day was saddened with heavy rain; a company of girls, who
had just finished their work of packing the fish for market, had
gathered in two empty railway vans, and were dancing together, in the
most delightful way, watched and applauded by a group of youths.

It was a dance of quick movement and of great variety. It was not a
dance of the feet only, every part of the girls’ bodies played its
part in the performance, the swaying figures, the beckoning hands,
the glittering smiles, that came and went in their dark eyes—all
contributed to the dance, which like all Spanish dances was a love
drama of intense passion; but always decorous, always beautiful. And
the watching youths took their part by a rhythmic clapping of hands and
stamping of feet. There was something infectious in this spontaneous
gaiety. These girls, I felt, understand happiness, and, as I watched
them, the world seemed once more a place in which workers could have
their share of the joy of living.

Nor does this overflowing and joyous vigour belong to youth alone. I
have seen mothers, stout and matronly, at play in the national games,
throwing large heavy balls of wood along the grass with a healthy
pleasure in muscular movement. Women, no longer young, may as often be
seen dancing as the girls. Well, I remember one woman; she was quite
old, and her skin was a yellowed mass of wrinkles. But the wrinkles
on her face were but the work of time and the hardness of living, and
went no deeper than the skin; they had not touched her soul. She was a
little bowed, yet she held herself finely, as indeed, do all Spanish
women. I shall never forget her perfect absence of self-consciousness;
her abandonment as she quivered all over with the excitement of the
dance—and she used her castanets with the innocent coquetry of a young
girl. There is something that may well give thought in this wholesome
energy, which is so abundant as to find its expression in play.

If I have emphasised the physical qualities of the women workers of
Spain, it is because I regard these qualities as being the outward
expression of intelligence and will. It is true that Spanish women are
not educated as we count education; many of them cannot read or write.
But in no other land can women be found with a finer understanding of
all that is essential in womanhood.

From the earliest notices we have of Spanish women we find them
possessed of a definite character of remarkable strength. Courage and
strength have throughout the centuries been common qualities among
Spanish women. The history of the _mujeres varoniles_ of this land
would fill a volume: women who would take the field and fight with a
sagacity and ferocity equal to, and often surpassing, that of men.

We may still associate the position of women with some of the old
traditions. Women are held in honour. Many primitive customs survive,
in particular among the Basques; and one of the most interesting is
that by which in some districts a daughter takes precedence over the
sons in inheritance of land and family property. As far back as the
fourth century, Spanish women insisted on retaining their own names
after marriage, for we find the Synod of Elvira trying to limit this
freedom. The practice is still common for sons to use the name of the
mother coupled with that of the father, and even in some cases alone,
showing the absence of preference for paternal descent. Velazquez, for
instance, is known to the world only by the name of his mother: his
father’s name was de Silva. It is significant that in no country does
less stigma fall on a child born out of wedlock; and the unmarried
mother meets a recognition that is rarely accorded to her elsewhere. I
questioned a cultured Spaniard on the position of the prostitute; his
answer is worth recording, “Our women give themselves for love much
more often than for money.” This statement may have some extravagance,
but I believe it corresponds to a real fact in the position of women,
which persists from a time when their liberty was greater than it is
to-day. The introduction of modern institutions, and especially the
empty form of chivalry, has lowered the position of women. Emilia Pardo
Bazan, the great woman novelist of Spain, has said, “All the rights
belong to men, and the women have nothing but duties.” Yet there can
be no question that some features of mother-right have left their
imprint on the domestic life of Spain, and that women have in certain
directions preserved a freedom and privilege which in England have
never been established, and only of late claimed.

The industrial side of primitive culture has always belonged to women,
and in many provinces in Spain the old custom is in active practice,
owing to a shortage of men through military service and widespread
emigration. The farms are worked by women, the ox carts driven by
women, the seed is sown and reaped by women,—indeed, all the work is
done by women. And the point to notice here is that the women have
benefited by this enforced engaging in activities, which in most
countries have been absorbed by men. The fine physical qualities of
these workers is evident. I have taken pains to gain all possible
information on this question. Statistics are not available because in
Spain they have not been kept from this point of view. It is, however,
the opinion of many eminent doctors, who were questioned by a Spanish
friend for me on this subject, that this labour does not damage the
health or beauty of the women, but the contrary, nor does it prejudice
the life and health of their children.

I have seen many charming scenes of labour; and among my memories
a visit I paid to a sardine factory in the town of Vigo stands out
clearly. The work-rooms open directly on to the bay; here the boats
come, the fish are landed and the silver heaps are washed. The airy
rooms were scarcely redolent even of fish; and the most scrupulous
cleanliness was evident. They were filled with girls, women, men, and
boys. I learnt that both the women and men are well paid, and that
there is no separation between the tasks allotted to the two sexes.
Women and men labour together side by side, capacity alone deciding
the kind of work done. The day’s work is the eight hours, established
in Vigo by arrangement between the masters and the workers; but when a
large catch of sardines comes in it must be dealt with at once, and
the workers are then paid overtime on a higher scale than their weekly
wages. I saw many ingenious and labour-saving machines, one, which
was worked by a boy, made the keys for opening the tins at the rate
of 140 a minute. I learnt that most of the machinery is supplied by
Germany. I was interested to hear that the waste pieces of tin, left
from cutting the boxes, were shipped to that country, to be used for
making toys. It was not, however, in these things that I found my chief
interest. What I chiefly remember was the fine appearance of the women.
I was impressed with their smiling and contented faces. Many of them
are mothers, and there is an admirable créche in connection with the
sardine factory, where the children are cared for. A more industrious
and charming scene of labour it would be impossible to find. I lost no
opportunity of inquiry into local industrial conditions. The workers in
this town are in a very favourable position, and in many respects Vigo
has attained to a degree of humane development under industrial life,
which other countries are toiling to achieve.

As workers the women are most conscientious and intelligent, apt to
learn, and ready to adopt improvements. From my personal observations
I can bear witness that their cottages, though very poor, are usually
clean, and their children are universally well cared for. Nowhere are
children happier or more loved than in Spain. The women are full of
energy and vigour even to an advanced age. They are certainly healthy.
I once witnessed an interesting episode during a motor-ride in the
country districts of the north. A robust and comely Spanish woman was
riding _a ancas_ (pillion fashion) with a young _caballero_, probably
her son. The passing of our motor frightened the steed, with the result
that both riders were unhorsed. Neither was hurt, but it was the woman
who pursued the runaway horse; she caught it without assistance and
with surpassing skill. What happened to the man I cannot say. When I
saw him he was standing in the road brushing the dust from his clothes.
I presume the woman returned with the horse to fetch him.

Women were the world’s primitive carriers. In Spain I have seen women
bearing immense burdens, unloading boats, acting as porters and as
firemen, and removing household furniture. I saw one woman with a chest
of drawers easily poised upon her head, another woman bore a coffin,
while another, who was old, carried a small bedstead. A beautiful
woman porter in one village carried our heavy luggage, running with
it on bare feet without sign of effort. She was the mother of four
children, and her husband was at the late Cuban war. She was as upright
as a young pine, with the shapeliness that comes from perfect bodily
equipoise. I do not wish to judge from trivial incidents, but I have
found in these Spanish women a strength and beauty that has become rare
among women to-day. When a fire breaks out in a small town or village
it is the women water-carriers who act as firemen. They fetch the
water from fountains and pour it upon the flames. Just recently I have
read of three of these women who lost their lives in an attempt to
rescue a cripple girl from a burning house.

I was never tired of looking at the Spanish water-carriers;
the fountains that are in every town are the most delightful
watching-places. The grace with which the women walk on the uneven
roads and their perfect skill in balancing their beautiful _jarras_ of
stone or copper called forth my unceasing admiration. One result of
this universal burden-carrying on the head is the perfect and dignified
character of the women’s manner of walking. These women walk like
priestesses who are bearing sacred vessels. They move erectly, but
without stiffness, with a secure and even stride, planting the foot and
heel together, light and firmly. There is something of the grace of
an animal in their movements—the alertness, the perfect balance, the
suggestion of hidden strength. I recall a conversation I had once with
an Englishman, of the not uncommon strongly patriotic and censorious
type. We were walking on the quay at La Coruna; he pointed to a group
of women-bearers, who were at work unloading a vessel, and said in his
indiscriminate British gallantry, “I can’t bear to see women doing work
that ought to be done by men.” “Look at the women!” was the answer I
made him.

It is interesting to contrast the robust heroines of Spanish writers
with the feminine feebleness and inanity which so often are the ideal
of English novelists. In Spanish literature vigour and virility, are
qualities apart from sex and are bestowed on women equally with men.

Again and again the thoughtful reader will be struck with this in the
works of the Spanish writers. It is a point of such interest that
one would like to linger upon it. I may mention, as one instance,
Cervantes’ heroines: the “illustre Fregona,” “beautiful, with cheeks
of rose and jessamine, and as hard as marble,” and Sancho’s daughter,
who was “tall as a lance, as fresh as an April morning, and as strong
as a porter.” Of Tirso de Molina, the great Spanish dramatist, it has
been said that he gives “all vigour to his women and all weakness to
his men.” Nor has this robust ideal of womanhood changed. We meet the
same qualities among the women depicted by the Spanish writers to-day.
Blasco Ibanez, in his “Flor de Mayo,” describes a young woman who could
meet “a stolen embrace with a superb kick, which more than once had
felled to the ground a big youth as strong and firm as the mast of
his boat.” Among the heroines of Juan Valera we find “Juanita” who,
“as a girl could throw stones with such precision that she could kill
sparrows, and leap on the back of the wildest colt or mule,” while Dona
Luz “could dance with a sylph, ride like an Amazon, and in her walk
resembled the divine huntress of Delos.”

It may of course be argued that these are chosen types that cannot
fairly be said to represent Spanish women. Yet the Spanish writers
are realists in a much truer sense than is understood amongst English
novelists, and it must be admitted that the persistence of the same
qualities in so many heroines proves a fundamental veracity in the type
presented; and from my own experience, I can testify that the women I
have known, in their vigour and independence, show the qualities of
these portrait women.

The fact can scarcely be passed over that these heroines almost all
belong to the country districts, sometimes even to the poorest people,
and if, as in the case of “Dona Luz,” they spring from a different
class, they are, as a rule, illegitimate, combining aristocratic
distinction with plebian vigour. This corresponds with my own
observations. I have found the women workers more robust and more
intelligent than the women of the middle and upper classes.

Nor is the explanation far to seek. The preparation that these women
receive for life is far inferior to that of the workers, who co-operate
with men, and whose lives are as actively productive, and work as
capably performed. The women of the richer classes lead lives of
marked inferiority; without opportunity for work, and compelled to an
existence of restricted activity, it is impossible to develop their
physical and intellectual qualities.

Most of these ladies, except when quite young, are stout, they
are less intelligent than the peasants, and few of them have ever
appealed to me as being beautiful. I hasten to add, however, that
they all have the fascination that belongs to Spanish women; a charm
not easy to define. I have spoken of this quality before, let me try
to make it clearer now. I believe it is that all these “senoras”
and “senoritas” understand that they are women, and instead of this
bringing them unhappiness and causing, as it so often does, the
indefinite unquietness that characterises so many English and American
women, you feel that they are glad that this is so. This is why they
are so attractive. Spanish women are in harmony with themselves, which
gives them something of that exquisite appeal which belongs to all
natural things. This is the reason too, why the older women are so
good-humoured, smiling and gay; they have none of them missed their
womanhood.

Here is the real reason of the admiration which these women so
universally arouse,—as women they are so perfect. This is a question
that reaches very deeply; it is a quality so easy to see, so difficult
to explain. What I wish to make clear is that the modern English ideal
for women leaves a wide margin open to desire; the innermost forces of
life too often are left unsatisfied, while the women of Spain, with
all their restrictions, know what it is that, after all, really brings
happiness for women. Which is the wiser knowledge?

The restrictions for women will pass with the expansion of modern life,
and then the strong personality of Spanish women, their energy and good
sense, will inevitably find expression when opportunity is given to
them. But never can they fall, in pursuit of outside things, into the
error of forgetfulness of their womanhood. There does not appear to be
any vagueness in the souls of these women: our women have so often too
much. In the composed presence of the Spanish ladies I have felt that
it is little profit to a woman if, in gaining the world, she should
lose herself.




THE DANGEROUS AGE

A TRACT FOR THE TIMES


I

Under this title the Danish writer, known as Karin Michaelis, in the
far-back years before the war—a time now marked as the terrible period
of the suffrage craze, gave to the world a remarkable and intimate
revelation of a woman. It is perhaps the most illuminating work that
has been written in recent years about women, from its rare quality of
femininity, expressed with an unconscious sincerity and biting truth.

It is very late in the day to describe a book which, though now
forgotten, was, at the time of its publication, very widely read and
still more widely criticised and discussed in almost all European
countries. It appeared at a time of great feminist unrest, which
accounts, to some extent, for the reception it gained.

The story matters very little, for it is not as the confession of one
woman that “The Dangerous Age” gains its importance, it is because it
affords a diagnosis of an old and a very great evil, as well it is an
acute observation of a certain type of woman’s soul or character.

It is from this aspect that I wish to approach it, and for this reason
I have called it “A Tract for the Times.”

Thus it is of very little importance to my present purpose that the
book is not a new one. It does not matter if the story is remembered,
or indeed, if the book itself has, or has not, been read. If the reader
will recall to his or her mind any one of the restless, unsatisfied
women they must know—women, not young but not old, they will have the
history (the variety in the details will not matter at all) of Elsie
Lindtner, the heroine of this story.

This admirable piece of observation deals with a section of women who
have come into being through our industrial civilisation with its
wrong ideals and stupid customs. Marcel Prévost[1] in his preface to
the book, speaks of Elsie Lindtner’s confession as a revelation of
the feminine soul of all time. With the latter part of this opinion I
entirely disagree. Rather would I say that it is a revelation of the
soul of woman as that soul has been evolved through the repression of
natural instincts and the want of satisfying fields for the expression
of energy, in an atmosphere which very surely gives birth to the modern
demons of confused desires and unconscious unhappiness.

The title of the book is not, I think, well chosen. The Dangerous
Age—Elsie Lindtner was forty-two when she wrote her confession—was
dangerous because of the life which had preceeded it. There is,
without doubt, a cleavage in life, which may be said to be marked by
the diminishing of attraction towards the opposite sex. But this is
common to men as well as to women. It belongs to no special age, and
its proportion of danger to the individual rests, first on the fulness
or poverty of experience before this period arrives, and secondly on
the power to extract from the past the joyous impulse for continuous
living. But to Elsie Lindtner, as to all women of such false and
restricted experience, it was far more than a cleavage, and because she
had never lived simply and completely, she experienced that emptiness
which strikes the soul with death when the consciousness comes that the
opportunities of life are passing.

The terror of approaching age robbed her of all her hope of future
happiness, just because she had emptiness in her past.

It is easy to condemn her, to speak of her selfishness, her falseness,
her colossal egoism—there are few adjectives of condemnation that I
have not heard applied to the Elsie Lindtner’s of life. Yet if we look
at the matter rightly, rather ought we to admire her for the perfect
self-sacrifice with which she pursued the one occupation.


II

The question at its root is one of right functioning. For mark the real
point of Elsie Lindtner’s history is this: all her actions were based
on search for pleasure. To gain the possessions of this world was the
fixed aim for which she bartered her soul. What does she tell us in
one of her letters? She is writing of her school-days. A class mate
had said to her, “Of course, a prince will marry you, for you are the
prettiest girl here.” She carried the words home to a maid who added to
the poison:

“That’s true enough,” she said, “a pretty face is worth a pocketful of
gold.”

“Can one sell a pretty face, then?” the child asked.

“Yes, to the highest bidder,” was the answer given.

The seed thus sown gave a rich harvest. Sex-trade became the object,
which Elsie Lindtner pursued with the same unflinching purpose
which directs all those who create for themselves the false gods of
possessions. Truly, while we support with our praise the successful
financier, we cannot in justice give less esteem to the woman who
pursues the same end in the way that is the easiest and surest of
success.

It is no part of my purpose to give a resumé of the history of Elsie
Lindtner. The details matter little; a structure of life built on a
false foundation must of necessity fall to ruin. And there is another
point I wish to make clear. The destroying penalty paid by this woman
for the gain of wealth and position was a failure of the power to
love. The real explanation of her unrest, hysteria, and manifold
symptoms of excitement was caused by the unceasing warfare within her
of two antagonistic forces—the desire for comfort and ease, partly
instinctive, but also fixed by habit, strengthened by a wish to keep
the moral dignity imposed upon women by the conditions of the society
in which she lived, fighting with the deeply instinctive desire for
satisfying sex experience to fulfil the functioning of life.

It is necessary for women to speak plainly. You cannot deny the needs
of the body, or prostitute their use, without the soul paying its
penalty. That is what women too often forget. A false purity held Elsie
Lindtner from giving herself to her lover, Jorgen Mallthe, and kept her
faithful in the letter of the law to the husband she had married for
his wealth. She had no children. I say without any doubt that she would
have been a purer and a better, because a happier and more healthy
woman, if she had followed the cry of her heart, at the first, as she
was driven in the end to want to do—when it was too late. That she did
not do this, but chose to sacrifice her lover in the same way that
she had sacrificed her husband must, in my opinion, be counted as sin
against her. Only the falseness which had wrapped her own life in a net
of pretence could have made her fail to see the truth for herself.

It is a fact of very special importance that Elsie Lindtner and all
the women who enter into this book belong to the Scandinavian race,
among whom chastity was extolled as the chief virtue of a woman, while
any lapse was punished with terrible severity. If the husband of an
ancient Dane discovered his wife in adultery he was allowed to kill
and castrate her lover. “There is a city,” says the Scandinavian Edda,
“remote from the sun, the gates of which face the north, poison rains
there through a thousand openings, the place is all composed of the
carcasses of serpents. There run certain torrents, in which are plunged
the bodies of the perjurers, assassins, and those who seduce married
women. A black-winged dragon flies incessantly round and devours the
bodies of the wretched who are there imprisoned.” Again, the Icelandic
Hava Maél contains this caustic apophthegm “Trust not the words of a
girl, neither to those which a woman utters, for their hearts have been
made like the wheel that turns round; levity was put into their bosoms.
Trust not to the ice on one day’s freezing, neither to the serpent
which lies asleep, nor to the caresses of her you are going to marry.”


III

Now, it may be asked: What has all this to do with Elsie Lindtner? My
answer is: “Everything!” The customs of a past social life do subsist
beneath the surface of modern society; we cannot without strong effort
escape from the chains of our inheritance. In the sad nations of the
cold north, where the natural joy of the body has been regarded as
something to be fought with and denied, a perpetual confusion has
arisen at the very source of life. For the sex-passion is a force, huge
and fateful, which has to be reckoned with. Woman is more primitive,
more intuitive, more emotional than man. And the outlets allowed to her
in the past have been more restricted; thus the price she pays for any
repression of the natural rights of love is heavier. Elsie Lindtner’s
history is a sermon to all those who set up the false god of chastity
for women.

I am aware that this statement will arouse opposition—especially in
women. To-day we hear much talk, and often among women who are working
nobly for the better life for women, of control of sex and the need of
imposing on men the same code of repression which for so long has been
imposed upon them. This is, of course, very natural, but that does not
make it wise. It is a truth realised by few women that repression is
not, and never can be, control. There seems to be a very widespread
opinion that to use the divine gift of sex even in marriage, for joy,
is wrong. One would be inclined to laugh, if the sadness of this
falsehood did not make one want to weep.

The whole subject, wide as life itself, escapes anything like adequate
treatment. The lady—the Elsie Lindtners of society—the household drudge
and the prostitute, are the three main types of women resulting in our
so-called civilisation of to-day, from the process of the past, and it
is hard to know which is the most wretched, which is the most wronged,
the most destructive, and the furthest removed from that ideal woman
which a happier future may evolve.

What, then, in conclusion, is the lesson to be learnt from this “Tract
for the Times?” Women must be free—free to work and free to love.
Then, and then only, can they claim to be the fitting mates of men,
then and then only, will they be able to fulfil aright their supreme
work as the mothers of the sons and daughters of the race. This is the
path along which freedom is to be found. What, then, is the individual
woman to do? This question is one which women at the present have to
answer for themselves. But one thing is certain—they must have the
courage to tear from their eyes the old and the new bandages that have
kept them, and still keep them, in the darkness of ignorance; better
even to sin and know the truth than to live in falsehood and in a
child’s world of pretence.




THE LEGAL POSITION OF THE MOTHER


In spite of the rapid advance that has been made, the legal
disabilities of women are still great. Especially is this so in their
relationship to their children.

Here where they should be supreme women have really no rights at all
under our laws.

They are not the legal parents of their own children. Only if their
child is illegitimately born, have they any rights of guardianship.
The law recognises the father as the one parent. He is entitled to the
custody of the children. He alone can say where they shall live or how
they shall be brought up: he alone has the legal right to decide how
they shall be educated or what religion they shall follow. No promise
that he makes, either before or after marriage is binding. The man may
change his mind at any time. The woman has no remedy. It is evident how
terrible a force for evil these rights may easily become in the hands
of an unscrupulous or vindictive man. If, for instance, the woman does
not choose to live where the husband directs, he may take her children
from her. Again, if there is any difference of opinion between the two
parents the opinion of the one parent—the father, must prevail. And
this is so even when the mother, and not he, is the supporter of the
family.

And the injustice continues even after death. The father has the right
to appoint a guardian to act with the mother, but a guardian appointed
by the mother can act only after both parents are dead. The children
have to be brought up according to any wishes expressed by the father
or even which it is inferred he has intended to express. This is
especially apt to cause trouble with regard to religion. Any relation
of the father (even when he himself has been either indifferent or
irreligious) may claim to have a woman’s children trained, _against
her wishes_, in the religion professed by the father’s family on the
ground that the father was nominally a member of that church.

Of course, when there is agreement between the parents, as happily is
the case in the great majority of marriages, the law does not matter.
Indeed very few mothers have any conception of their position under the
law. That is the only reason why these horrible and out-of-date laws
have not been repealed.

Fortunately they are unlikely to remain a dark blot upon our statute
book. An admirable Bill has been formulated under the direction of
the National Union of Societies for Equal Citizenship, which will
remedy this long-standing injustice. It has the long title of the
Guardianship, Maintenance, Custody and Marriage of Infants Bill. Its
two great objects are:—

  (1) To make the mother as well as the father the legal parent of her
      children.

  (2) To impose upon both fathers and mothers the liability to maintain
      their children according to their means.

There are many further admirable provisions, as for instance, the one
which gives both parents equal rights in appointing guardians. Where
the child is under 16 and has no property, present or expectant, the
case may be dealt with in Courts of Summary Jurisdiction (or Police
Courts). This is most important, as it makes the benefits of the equal
guardianship possible to the working classes, which would not be so, if
cases, as at present, had to be heard in High Courts or County Courts.

I shall not trouble to answer the few determined obstructionists who
have opposed this Bill. They say that it will cause difficulty in the
home, and provide a reason for quarrel between husband and wife. I
have too high an opinion of men and women and of their love of their
children to believe this. The cases of dispute, sufficiently serious
to be brought into the courts, will always be comparatively few. And a
decision of justice will be much easier when the partners have an equal
status. Then the welfare of the children will be the decisive factor
and not as now, the desires of the parents.

Equal guardianship laws are in operation already in many countries: and
wherever they have been established they have worked excellently and
must be regarded as a complete success.




PROBLEMS OF BIRTH CONTROL


It is generally admitted that there is much to be gloomy about in these
days of bad trade and post-war morals. And yet, perhaps, the poor old
world does improve in some respects.

One of the most hopeful signs of this improvement to me is the very
widespread interest that has been taken of late in birth control.
Conferences are held, law-suits are fought and won; pamphlets are
written and in almost every town lectures are given, and everywhere
groups of earnest-minded people come together to discuss and to learn.
Our sense of responsibility has been quickened in connection with
birth and the bringing a new life into the world. In a deeper and
more practical way we have come to know that no child should be born
_unwanted_.

Now, possibly all this suggests no very great moral advance to you. It
may be that you regard it as wrong to regulate births in any way. Yet
surely it is well for this difficult problem to be carefully considered
in open discussion. To avoid error we must have knowledge. For myself,
as I have listened to speakers or read of what is being done, though
possibly I am in sharp opposition to much that is believed and advised,
yet always I am glad when I reflect that only a little while ago the
very mention of birth control would have been impossible at any public
meeting, nor would any paper have noticed it.

Everywhere since the war the increased interest in the question has
been astonishing. Is it, I have asked myself, that the terrible loss of
life has forced us at last to have a deeper understanding of the value
of life? Certainly all over the world women and men are beginning to
understand the right of every child to be well-born.

The relations between the poverty of the family and its size must be
considered in connection with this question. Much stress is also
rightly laid on the injurious effect on the mother of continuous and
unwilling child-bearing, and on the resulting terrible wastage of life
in mis-carriages and still-births. Personally, I should always like to
hear more of the effect on the children unfortunate enough to live.
_For the child is unfortunate who is born into a home unwanted by its
mother._

To give life well it must be given gladly. There can be no deeper
tragedy than an unwilling motherhood.

The moral and religious aspects of family limitation have to be
considered. It needs to be emphasised how more and more religion to-day
refuses to divorce the spiritual from the material necessities of man,
and how it begins to appreciate that the bread-and-butter difficulties
of life have the greatest effect on the moral character of the people.

If a criticism on the work of those who advocate birth control may be
offered, it is that too much time is spent in saying what everyone
agrees with. Propositions, which all who think at all practically
accept, are gravely supported with elaborate arguments. More might
be accomplished if these elementary questions were left and freer
discussions given to the many grave problems which still await
investigation. There are so many questions on which far more knowledge
needs collecting before any definite conclusions of permanent value can
be accepted.

Roughly classified, birth control needs to be studied from three
different aspects:—

First, there is the effect upon the married couple.

Second, there is the effect upon the child.

And lastly, there is the effect of voluntary limitation of the
birth-rate upon society.

In estimating the consequences to the man and the woman, it is
impossible to neglect the psychological results.

The effect upon the mind is far stronger and more lasting than any more
direct result. I mean, it is what the individual woman or man _feels_
about limitation that is important for them. It is their own attitude
to what they do that will mainly decide the results it will have. This
is a question of the deepest complication. And much more knowledge
is needed, and the greatest care is called for not to form hasty and
unproved opinions. It is, I must insist, an individual question that
can never be arbitrarilly decided, even by those competent to form a
decision. That is why so much that is said, even by doctors who ought
to know better, is so absurd.

Much easier to estimate is the effect upon the child. Here we seem to
be on firmer ground. To save the unwanted child from being born or
conceived by drunken or syphilitic parents is a work of such plain
morality that there would appear to be no room for difference of
opinion.

Yet the question is deeper and far more difficult than this; there
are, indeed, a whole group of problems connected with it. There is,
for instance, the case of the only child, who always suffers grave
disadvantages, brought up in a home with adults.

Again the childless or one-child marriage is often not happy for those
who love children. This is felt, in particular, when one partner
desires children and the other refuses to have them born. And it must
not be forgotten that all that affects the parents, must also have its
results on any child that is born. Apart from economic necessities, the
small, limited family is, in many ways, harder to bring up than the
large family.

With regard to the effect of birth control on society, it is now
becoming a familiar reflection that often those least fitted to carry
out parental duties, because of faults of character or misfortune of
circumstances, have the largest families.

Here the main problem is not so much to teach the mere knowledge of how
families are to be limited as to induce that control and to stir up
such desire as will lead to limitation being practised.

But of course, the alteration of the characters of men and women is a
task of too great difficulty to be treated as a side issue.

Yet I would not end with any word of discouragement. As I started by
saying, the mere consideration of these difficult questions in the
broad light of day must be felt, by all of us who are old enough to
remember the attitude in the past, as a wholesome sign of the times.

We care more, and very slowly we are growing more honest.




SECTION II

CHILDREN




A BOY’S MISERY


Quite the saddest thing I have come across for some time is the account
of the suicide from remorse of a widow, who drowned herself in utter
misery; her body being found near the spot where a fortnight before
that of her son, aged eleven, had been discovered. The boy, it seems
had committed suicide after being accused of stealing money belonging
to his mother.

Even from the bare outline of what happened there stands out stark,
like some haunting fiend of pain, the agony suffered by this boy and
mother before each sought the merciful quietness of death.

I find myself conscious of emotion stronger and more vexing than the
strangling sense of pity. I am angry at the waste of two lives, and
especially of the fine young life so grievously destroyed. Why, I ask
myself, do we torture children by forcing on their sensitive natures
punishment for failure in right conduct, while we make no attempt to
understand the hidden struggles and unexplained emotions that almost
always are the cause? How is it we fail to remember so completely our
own growth, the mistakes we made, the undiscovered sins that now we
have forgotten?

This boy stole from his mother. A thief you call him—a bad and
ungrateful son.

But wait—think! Why did he steal?

An easy question, perhaps, you will say to answer. He desired to buy
sweets, wished to visit the cinema; he had been betting with his
marbles and getting into bad habits; or he wanted to swagger as a
capitalist among his friends. Yes, that sounds probable enough; some
such were, I expect, the reasons given by the mother, probably believed
in by the boy himself. For so often we force the acceptance of our
adult stupidities upon our children. The poor boy counted himself a
thief, believed that he had sinned; he felt that he had wronged the
mother whom he loved so much. He did not know, for there was no one to
tell him, that he did not care at all for the money he stole for these
trivial reasons. No, he did not know. But underneath, hidden in the
darkness of his young soul, there was a stronger driving imperative,
unknown and unsuspected by any one, most of all by the boy himself,
which was the irresistible force that caused him to steal.

The reason of his action is really simple and would be recognised at
once by any psychologist. It must be sought in the relation of the boy
to his mother. He was not loved enough. At least, in some way, he was
unhappy in his home relationship—at conflict in his innermost nature.
He stole money, though, he did not know it, because he wanted love.

Of his life, through his eleven years, I lack the information that
would provide us with the necessary details of proof. It is exceedingly
improbable that the details will be forthcoming, for this boy was
unknown and his death even at the time, caused no stir. But it is a
very certain inference from the evidence of the excessive remorse that
drove him to take his own life that, sometime in his earlier years, he
had suffered some shock of jealousy or stress of misery in relation to
his mother, that initiated the trouble, which later had to force an
expression by means of his thefts.

I hope that I make my meaning clear. The idea of “transferring” a
feeling into a quite different action may be a little strange to you.
Yet everyone knows that, if you are angry with someone and dare not
show it, you may gain relief from some kind of violent action entirely
unconnected with the cause of the angry feelings. The boy who is afraid
of his father, or is otherwise unhappy in his home, is very likely
to be a “bully,” he takes what he has suffered out of someone weaker
than himself. And it is the same process when the suppressed painful
feelings of jealousy or other unhappiness take the form of spending
money. The impulse is so powerful that if the money cannot be got in
any other way, it will be stolen.

In many children there arises jealousy in connection with their home
relationships, often without reason, but none the less real to the
childish imagination, and this causes them to doubt the parental love
that is as necessary to them as the sun to the flower. In its mild
and practically harmless form this feeling of being neglected, which
few children quite escape, is only occasionally active and remains
unrecognised, though it is the frequent cause of irritability, of minor
sicknesses and faults in behaviour. The results in aggravated cases
are far more important, and cause, not infrequently, such a desperate
consciousness of inferiority, with an always pressing sense of wanting
something, that there arises an overpowering physical and spiritual
necessity for the liberation of the hidden trouble. This relief is
found usually in acts of violence, frequently in stealing.

In the case we are considering we see the boy, beyond all shadow
of doubt, over-sensitive, the symptoms of the unconscious trouble
expressing themselves, on the one side, in an exaggerated feeling
of inferiority, and, on the other, in a compelling need to find
opportunity for the assertion of power. I do not know just how it
happened. Maybe, his mother, who has paid with her life in passionate
remorse, was too hindered with the troublesome details of life to be
able to cultivate and pick the flowers of love. I cannot know, but _I
do know_ that in the tender psyche or soul of that poor boy was some
terrible need for his mother’s love—a want which he did not understand,
indeed, of which he was probably wholly unaware. He may even have been
in outward rebellion, have thought he was indifferent to his mother,
but such a state would but furnish further witness to the trouble
within. Had he known what it was he wanted, he would not have done what
he did. But the ever-disturbing need, causing confusion in his soul,
drove him to steal the most obvious thing that he was without and his
mother possessed—that was money.

I do not hesitate to state that in the great majority of cases of
boyish thieving the reasons for the act must be sought in some deeply
hidden cause, marking some inner disturbance, with a feeling of wanting
something which the boy does not understand. The taking of small
sums of money or other pilfering acts is a covering-mask, and has no
connection with crime. There is one thing further that it is necessary
to remember. Though the fault of boyish thieving is not in itself a
sign of any moral failure in the character, our treatment of such
small thefts—our adult stupidity in understanding the difficulties and
seeking out the concealed unhappiness of the young soul, often hounds
on the stealing boy into the thief.

We make criminals of the young because we are blind and hardened with
our own failures and minor struggles. We also cause, as in the case of
this boy who killed himself, the most heart-breaking tragedies. It is
appalling even to contemplate the suffering brought quite uselessly
upon boys and girls by grown-up foolish ignorance.

We show too little imagination in our treatment of the child who does
wrong. We rarely remember his almost terrible sensitiveness, nor do we
consider the unusual advantage (from the point of view of the child)
that we possess just in being grown-up. And nothing, as I have said
before, is to the boy plainer as a sign of this grown-up freedom than
the power we have (or rather that they think we have) to spend money
how we like and when we like. That is why the taking of money is one of
the most common symbolic acts for a boy’s wish for love or power.

That boyish theft is often pathological is proved by the fact that the
objects stolen are often useless to the boy, that they are hidden away,
and, as a rule, forgotten, and further that the boy forgets, or almost
forgets, what he has stolen or how he took them. Some boys have a
passion for stealing certain objects which they will take over and over
again. Those who have had anything to do with delinquent children well
know these symptoms.

In nearly all cases the thieving is repeated over long periods;
although each act may be followed by violent remorse. Parents and all
those who have to deal with these childish wrong doers, should know
that this sorrow, especially if it is emotionally excessive, serves
only to increase the tendency to a fresh repetition of the theft. For
remorse fixes the boy’s attention on his stealing, and, still more, on
the pleasurable feelings that unconsciously to himself are connected
with the act. He remembers these, though he does not know it, whenever
he thinks of his wickedness in stealing. And this fixity of attention
in itself is a kind of rehearsal of the act, that is very likely to
lead to an actual performance of it. Boyish remorse is, no doubt,
gratifying to parents, but, almost invariably, it is harmful to the boy.

Whenever the boy thinks how bad he is, how wrong and disastrous an act
would be, he is in danger of being compelled to perform that act. Most
of us have experienced this, but we forget its application to the moral
conduct of the young. Once think how terrible it would be to fall down
the precipice, and the idea of jumping down approaches.

Remorse is a form of temptation. And all forms of temptation should,
if possible, be avoided in dealing with the misconduct of children. If
your boy steals money do not leave money lying about. Also, even if he
has stolen money several times, express no faintest suspicion as to his
not using honourably any money entrusted to him, for some necessary
purpose, such as paying railway fares or buying a school book. Never be
suspicious over the change such a child brings you. As he steals from a
feeling of inferiority, and, in particular, because through jealousy,
whether imagined or real, he feels himself less blessed with the love
of those about him than other more confident children, any sign of your
not being able to trust him, must render him more liable to err.

If the thieving boy were treated with sympathy and understanding, and
loved and helped, instead of being blamed and often cruelly punished,
there would be fewer grown-up thieves.




CRIMINALS MADE IN OUR NURSERIES


Every child suffers sometimes from a feeling of inferiority. He is so
much smaller and weaker than the grown-ups who control his play and
his work that he feels uncomfortably helpless against their authority,
which to him seems often to be exercised in an arbitrary and unkind way.

There are times when this consciousness of being little and weak is
so overwhelming that the child is bound to do something to convince
himself of his own powerfulness.

It is then that he becomes naughty. For the very easiest way to
command the attention of his mother, and the other adults who are
with him, is by being naughty. Good, he is left alone. The grown-ups
go on with their own occupations. He feels neglected. At most he is
mildly praised. “Johnnie is a nice quiet boy to-day.” But this is very
different from the attention he commands when he is naughty. He defies
authority. For a short time he becomes a despot, ruling the grown-ups
who usually rule him. His sensation of power is intensely enjoyable.
And the more disturbance he makes in the nursery life the deeper is
his satisfaction. Of course, he is sorry afterwards. But his sorrow is
not really for the first period of successful rebellion, but for the
following time after his power fails.

Now, it is very important for the mother to understand this. The real
problem is to minimise as much as can be of the child’s enjoyment of
naughtiness.

Any unwisdom on the mother’s part such as her being too emotionally
concerned, indulging in nagging or violent anger, may have very serious
results. Inevitably the child feels as he sees his mother’s tears and
want of control, “I have caused this.” Instead of being weak he is
master of his mother. That is why usually he is good after he has been
naughty.

But this kind of nursery behaviour is disastrous to the child’s
character.

Let me tell you a rather striking story to illustrate this. A young
boy, very naughty, was sent to bed. His mother, greatly troubled, went
some hours later to his room. He was kneeling, praying. She thought he
was asking God to forgive him. But this was what she heard: “Please,
dear God, forgive my bad mummy for being so unkind to poor little
Freddy.” The boy grew up in the most unfortunate way. I cannot give
the details and there were, of course, several causes. Yet certainly
his character suffered the first wrong in the nursery from an unwise
emphasising by his mother of his own importance.

The naughty child is always the child over-occupied with thoughts
of himself. And his feelings are unhealthily important to him just
because he finds himself for some cause at a disadvantage. Parents,
unconsciously, but very foolishly, emphasise their children’s
inferiority; they speak of their weakness, tell them they are too
little to do this or that, never realising the danger of what they are
doing.

Children must not be subjected to conditions of emotional stress, which
increase unnecessarily their inevitable consciousness of inferiority
in an adult world. If the parents do not find out and remedy the cause
of these feelings (which they ought to know are invariably present
whenever a child is naughty) and provide an expression by which the
desired power is gained in a right way, let me warn them that they are
dangerously limiting their children’s chance of a successful and happy
life. By connecting pleasure with bad conduct, they are certainly,
though they do not know it, making the way easy for every kind of
future bad conduct.

The fate of all children is decided in the nursery; criminals are made
there as well as saints and heroes.




THE TYRANNY OF PARENTS


In the life of every girl and every boy there come times when they
must, and should, free themselves from the thraldom of the home.

This may sound hard to parents, who desire almost always to keep their
children in tutelage, and cannot often even think of them except as
belonging to the home and to themselves.

Yet the young must rebel, must escape from this too-closely-binding
yoke of love. They have to break away from the moorings of safety; to
adventure; to find a place for themselves; to get into the world and to
establish their own lives as women and men.

We should hear much less of trouble between parents and children if
fathers, and especially mothers, could be made to understand that the
conflict with their growing boys and girls is not a personal conflict;
that it has nothing, or at least very little, to do with the actual
situation, and is not directly dependent on anything that either the
parents or the children may do or may not do. And this is comforting to
parents—it does not mean that their children love them less.

No, the conflict is based on an inescapable psychological opposition.
It is the necessity of the young to escape from the tyranny of the old.

The parent’s hand is needed to steady the child, while it is unable
to stand firmly on its own feet or to guide its own steps; but as the
child grows older, it must learn to walk alone. If the mother persists
in holding out a hand, never lets the child fall down, she destroys a
proper independence and the hand held-out-too-long is used to satisfy
the mother’s selfish desire; to give her the pleasure she gains from
the child’s dependence on herself, and not because of any need of the
child for help.

You will see the application of this illustration.

Many mothers prolong the years of childish helplessness and absence
of initiative because they do not want their children to grow up.
Especially they check the boy’s or the girl’s independent feelings and
impulses by persistently guiding them.

There is an immense, but usually unrecognised, selfishness in the
apparently devoted parent. Such devotion ignores the right of the young
to discover for themselves.

The separation between parent and child needs to be more than a
mere separation in space. Sending a boy or a girl away to school
or elsewhere does not separate it from the home ties; often such a
separation but serves to bind them more fixedly. What is needed is a
psychological separation—an emotional freedom from the too-crippling
dependence of childhood. There is the need to take the home standards
and compare them with other standards of the world; the getting rid
of the old excessive reverence for the parents. They, too, must be
criticised and judged.

This process of liberation is difficult and very painful to the child;
that is why so often there is rebellion and unkindness. And the danger
is greater because, at this period, the boy or the girl is so easily
discouraged, turns back so readily with kindness to the old safety.
And if this is countenanced by the parents, who continue to offer a
too-protective affection, the character of the boy or the girl is
weakened so that in after years they will not be able to meet the
necessities of adult action.

The too fond mother or father perpetuates the childhood of their sons
and daughters. They are a far more real danger to their children than
neglectful or careless parents.

It is worthwhile considering some of the reasons why parents do too
much for their children; are too careful to keep them bound to the home
and within the protection of parental love.

The parents who have failed in satisfying their own desires see in
their children a new opportunity. They hope for vicarious satisfaction.
And for this reason, rather than for the reasons of unselfish love
which they believe rule their conduct, they will sacrifice themselves
so that their children may achieve what they have failed in gaining.
They are to hand down and maintain _their name_, to keep in the world
_their family_, and all that seems of value _in themselves_—all that
would be lost by their approaching extinction.

If we stop to think, we shall see how common and easy it is for parents
to use their children as instruments of satisfaction. Wherever one
or other parent is unhappy, suffering under some unsatisfied desire,
they seek to satisfy these desires through their children. Do we not
know that the wife, and sometimes also the husband, not happy in their
own marriage concentrate their hopes of a satisfying life on their
children. The mother wants her daughters to be literally, wholly
devoted to her; she loves again in her love for her sons; or the father
compensates himself with his devotion to his daughters, while he seeks
to satisfy his desire for power by completely directing the life of his
sons.

All this is quite wrong. It breaks the power of the young; turns them
into dutiful automatons, instead of rebellious adventurers. Constantly
thwarted, too much protected, they become necessarily less capable of
effort, with a weakened power for action. The model boy or girl of
parents and schoolmasters is almost always a failure in life.

Such parents love their children too selfishly and too possessively.
Seeking emotional relief, they drain for themselves the storehouse of
energy which their children ought to preserve for their own lives.

The danger is deep and far reaching, a too great and unhealthy
attachment to either parent may, and often does, cause an inability to
transfer an adequate share of loyalty and affection from the parent to
the wife or husband. It may check the desire to marry. The man’s choice
of a life partner is guided by an infantile vision of his idealised
mother; and then, after marriage, he will seek from his wife the
feelings of a mother. That is, he will want to be helped and mothered
instead of wishing to guide and protect.

This is a very frequent cause of unhappiness in marriage.

Strange as this may seem, the true Don Juan owes his incapacity to find
satisfaction in love to the fact that he searches unconsciously for
what he can never find, the lost features of his childhood’s mother. He
is unfaithful to all women because he is faithful to one woman.

Again the girl may feel towards her husband as she did towards her
father; she may be too obedient, too uncritical to be a true helpmate;
or, and this is much more serious, a too excessive identification with
the mother may render difficult and even impossible the right response
to love.

It is not too much to say that, wherever there is this over-attachment
and persistence of the childhood attitude, or where the conflict to
break from the too heavy tyranny is very severe, the whole career and
the whole love-history of the adult life is settled and decided—damned
and fated to disaster from the start. Indeed the seed of failure, of
unhappiness, even of crime and vice, often is set in helpless children
by the selfishness and ignorance of over-affectionately helpful
parents, whose too much interference, too emotional solicitude, blocks
the narrow passes that lead on to open and independent life.




THE SUPERFLUOUS FATHER


In many homes, where there are children, the father seems a
stranger—almost an intruder.

The central figure in the family is the mother. All the details of
her life are familiar to the children; she is seen shopping, cooking,
looking after the home. The father is a little mysterious; he goes
adventuring in the unknown world. He is picturesque and wonderful; an
exciting figure that arouses nursery admiration—but he is unnecessary.

At first the mother occupies all the child’s attention. She supplies
food, comfort, shelter, teaching and brings happiness to the nursery.
She is the first love-object and of supreme importance; the starting
point of all those interests of the children which lie outside of
themselves.

But the other parent—the superfluous father, comes both as interrupter
and friend into this mother-child circle. He plays with the children,
opens up new delightful ways of interest, brings the movement that
children love. But also he is a disturber. He absorbs the mother, draws
her attention and care from the children. He upsets the order and
balance of the nursery. He almost dethrones the baby.

Thus at a very early age jealousy of the father begins to stir and
unsettle the nursery peace. Usually we either treat this childish
jealousy as a joke or refuse to admit its presence, but it is deadly
earnest to the child itself. If the mother is capricious, varying
in her attentions to her husband and to her children, or if she is
over-tender and too demonstratively affectionate, this jealousy may,
and indeed, must work great and permanent evil.

You see, it imposes a conflict in the exquisitely responsive child,
between the emotions of hate and anger and envy born of jealousy, and
the emotions of love and admiration and obedience dependent on a sense
of the benefits conferred by the father.

It is the duty of the mother so to balance her favours and her love
that the rights of the husband and the children are both maintained,
and neither side is tempted to be a monopolist.

For it is not only the children who are jealous of the father. Often
the father is jealous of the children. And often he has cause. Some
women, when once the child is born, regard their husbands solely as the
person for providing money necessary for the maintenance of the home.
In any other capacity she has ceased to desire him, frankly he is in
the way.

The mother type often ceases, after motherhood, to be the loving
mate—the wife. There is so little time for love making in a nursery
home. The man becomes a superfluity, his demands tend to be delegated
to holidays that are planned, but do not often occur.

Nature herself seems to condemn the man in his capacity as father. So
delicate is the bond which attaches him to the child as compared with
the unbreakable bindings which hold the child to the mother; so readily
can he be pushed outside the circle of the family, where, as a member
apart, he will inevitably seek his own interests and pleasures.

Now, whether this complete severance happens or not, some conflict
between the father and his children, especially between father and sons
is almost bound to occur. This is a war which is normal and, indeed,
inevitable—far more so than any class-war, any opposition and struggle
between the nations.

Have we not read of the solitary polygamous father of the past, the Old
Man of the Tribe, who drove his sons out of the horde as they grew up,
because in his greed he wanted all the women to be his wives? Much time
has passed since then, but these emotions are very old and very strong.
Pity and the gentler feelings of civilisation enable the father to
accept the son as a member of the family and as a companion instead of
a rival. But echoes remain of the old instincts of jealous rivalry.

No science is so difficult or so important as psychology. It is
because parents do not understand their own minds or the minds of
their children that they make such mistakes. They do not see that some
jealousy and opposition in family relationships are inevitable and,
in fact, useful. Else the child would never grow up, would always be
overwhelmed by its parents.

So do not let us be too alarmed if sons oppose fathers, or if fathers
are wanting in sympathy with their sons.

Yet it must be remembered finally, on the other side, that the
authority of the father has to be maintained. Superfluous in the
family, from one point of thought, his influence is nevertheless of
the most urgent importance. Without it a too great dependence on self
is fostered at too early an age, which sets up an intolerant and
unreasoning hatred of all authority and an inability to suffer any kind
of restraint.

The father thus needs to preserve his rights and duties within the
home. If women have had to fight for the Vote and the open door to the
profession, the father may have to fight for the love of his children
and the key to the nursery.

He must refuse to be regarded as superfluous.




THE PERFECT MOTHER


A few weeks ago a shower of sudden rain brought me for shelter into
the house of a kindly stranger, who beckoned me in from the position I
had taken under the thickly foliaged trees, bordering her garden. She
was a woman who exuded kindness. You know the type—opulent in figure,
wholesome and ripe, her face beaming in wide wrinkles of pink flesh.

The sudden generous smile of the big mouth showed her the possessor
of a real charm. Her eyes had a blue twinkle that attracted laughter.
Quite plainly she would be delightful as a mother. For about her was
something that conjured visions of nursery fires, of warm, sweet
bread-and-milk, of sugar plums after nasty powders, and of kisses
and forgiveness given for childish wrong doing, without any unfair
bargaining for repentence.

But this woman had no child. Nature does not always, in this matter,
act as intelligently as she might. We all know of many Betsy Trotwoods.
On the other hand, we find children lavished wastefully—yes,
children, swarming in the cold homes of mothers who do not want
them—women without understanding of children or any trace of parental
passionateness. Do you not recall many modern prototypes of Mrs.
Jellaby?

I felt my bowels ache for this woman with her rich and wasted
motherhood. Her opulent affections were lavished not, as they should
have been, on the tender warm bodies of little children, but on dogs.

Never have I seen so many dogs: they were placed all over the rather
small room. Both easy chairs were occupied by a canine seater. There
was a mother with new baby-pups in a lined basket before the great
fire. Another dog who was sick was in another basket, wrapped in a
shawl, on the other side of the fire. The room was stifling, and had
a sick, close, doggy smell. And though I am a lover of dogs, I felt
disgusted. I really hated those pampered toys, that snarled and snapped
and grumbled at me in the most horrible way. Believe me, I am not
exaggerating. You could not speak. The whole room was dogs. Enough! Let
us leave them and get on to something of greater value.

It was that thought which caught and gripped my attention. This woman’s
unfilled life. I could not forget it: it stayed with me long after I
had left the house—a memory not to be obliterated.

She was forlorn among her dogs. It was a tragedy of waste. I have had
so many dreams of the perfect mother that I was stung to anger and
impatience to find her, at last here, squandering her affections on a
canine brood.

The situation was so plain. This woman needed children, if not of
her flesh, then adopted and made her own by the rich fullness of her
motherhood.




NOBODY’S CHILDREN

CHILD ADOPTION: A MUCH NEEDED REFORM


It was a short time after I had found “the perfect mother” thus wasted,
that there came into my hands the “White Paper” which gives in full the
wise and interesting Report of the Committee on Child Adoption. I knew
that here was just the very thing that was wanted. Here was shewn the
means by which the motherly childless woman and the motherless child
could be brought together.

The desire for child adoption has never been stronger than it is at the
present time. But I do not hesitate to say that, in the present absence
of any law to regulate and safeguard adoption, the position is so set
about with difficulties and so pressed with continuous dangers that
the practice ought to be actively discouraged. It is dangerous for the
adopter and, what matters even more, it is dangerous for the child.

The emphatic and unanimous decision of the Committee was that there
is immediate necessity for a change in the law to make the adoption
of children legal in this country. Every one who gave evidence was
unanimously in favour of adoption in all cases where, for one reason
or another, any child could not have the care of its own parents. It
is much better for every child to be brought up in a home than in an
institution. Not only is it cheaper, but the child benefits far more.
But adoption needs to be regulated and legalised. The child is too
precious a possession to leave to anyone to do with as they desire.

The report recommends:—

  1. That after obtaining the consent of the real parents and the
     adopting parents, as well as the consent of the child, if he
     (or she) is over fourteen, all adoption shall be sanctioned by
     a judicial authority.


  2. That confidential official inquiries shall be made from time to
     time, as to the child’s progress and happiness in the adopted home.

  3. That the child shall take the adopter’s name, and shall have, as
     far as is possible, the position of a natural child.

This Report was presented in June, 1921. Yet nothing has been done. And
what I wish to emphasize with all the power that I have, is the crime
of this delay and the urgent need there is for immediate legislation.
Children are waiting to be adopted; childless people are waiting to
adopt. Surely it ought not to be difficult to frame a simple law that
would safeguard the interests of both.

There is little wonder that hitherto adoption has not been popular in
this country. One strong reason that has prevented the far-sighted
from attempting it is that in England there is no legal method by
which adoption can be carried out. And because of this there is, as I
have said, too much danger connected with it, as well as not enough
certainty of its continuance. For the law grants the foster-parent no
recognised control over the child.

There is the ever present fear, increasing as the years pass and the
child grows up, lest the natural parent shall come one day and claim
the right to take the child away—an injustice specially likely to
happen as the child becomes older and is able to earn money.

Then there is, on the other side, the possibility (often realised) of
the adoption being a commercial transaction between the parent (most
frequently an unmarried mother) and a foster-parent, by which the
latter receives a sum of money and takes over an unwanted child, who
most frequently dies. It is horrible to contemplate.

But indeed, always, there is the dangerous position of the
adopted child, who has no settled position, no legal claim on the
foster-parents, who may adopt a child in the most solemn manner and
keep it all through the attractive years of childhood, then, when
the less attractive years of adolescence begin, or when any change
in circumstances makes the adopted child no longer wanted, they can
calmly withdraw their protection and turn the child out of their home.
Again, I say, it is horrible to contemplate. The destiny of the adopted
child is controlled throughout the unprotected years of childhood and
of youth by the whim and caprice, both of the natural parent and the
adopted-parent.

And do not comfort yourself by believing that these are merely
imaginary troubles. They occur every day as every one knows who has
any knowledge of the practice and results of child adoption in this
country. I personally know of many cases of injustice that have brought
disaster and unhappiness to the child. Let me tell you one. A boy
was adopted by a man, unmarried, a minister of God, who was a social
worker and greatly attached to children. But later in his life the man
married. Under pressure from his mother, accounted as a religious and
good woman, the adoption was cancelled, the boy, wanted no longer, was
sent to a home for homeless children. No one troubled about him. Or
take another case where an illegitimately born child—a baby girl, was
abandoned and afterwards reclaimed _three times during the first five
years of her life_! Each time the mother took her away from a happy
home with foster-parents who loved and cared well for her. Then after a
few months of neglect the mother again abandoned her. They had no legal
remedy against the caprice of the mother.

These unguarded children belong to nobody. Here is an amazing gap
in our law. It is worse than that—it is an amazing gap in our
consciousness and sense of social responsibility. “Nobody’s children!”
the phrase has a pitiable and stinging significance. Yet it is just
this state of things we are countenancing with our lazy and callous
indifference. There are tens of thousands of little ones for whom
to-day it is bitter truth that they belong to no one. Orphaned, or
unwanted by their natural-parents, many of them are being adopted in
the worst and most casual manner—handed out “on probation” like a cat
or a dog.

And if you doubt the truth of this statement, listen to the judgment of
the Committee on Child Adoption as to the disgraceful carelessness with
which adoption is being carried on in this country;

  “We believe that the absence of proper control over the ‘adoption’ of
  children over seven years of age and under that age unless payment
  is made, results _in an undesirable traffic in child life with
  which no one can interfere_, unless proceedings are taken against
  the adopting parent for cruelty or neglect; children may be handed
  from one person to another, with or without payment, advertised
  for disposal, and even sent out of the country without any record
  being kept. _Intermediaries may accept children for ‘adoption’ and
  dispose of them as and when they choose._ Homes and institutions for
  the reception of the children exist which are not subject to any
  inspection.” (Paragraph 61, page 10 of the Report.)

The italics in this passage are mine; will you try to think what these
conditions, _which you are permitting_, mean? Think of them with
your hearts, not with your heads! And if you have a child of your
own, passionately dear to your life, try to realise the abominable
position—the cruelty that can hardly be escaped, as if it were _your
child_, who was thus being handed callously from one person to another,
without protection, without any form of legal guardianship.

We talk much of the nation’s care for children. Would it not then seem
a necessary step to have some just provision of our law to protect the
helpless unwanted child, who at present belongs to nobody? Humanity,
and even good sense answers, “Yes.” The Common Law of England has
hitherto always said most emphatically, “No.” _Except for a reference
to adoptions which has managed to slip into a marginal note of a
Finance Act, there is no recognition of adoption in our laws._

The right thing to do is the simple thing. We have on the one hand,
these homeless children, whose numbers have become much larger in these
last years and with the change and slackening in responsible conduct,
while on the other hand, we have, an increased number of women who
are childless and will never be able to marry. The problem, at its
simplest, is this: What can be done to bring together the childless
woman with a mother’s nature and the motherless child?

I am not forgetting the Institutions that are already in existence.
There are two agencies for arranging adoption, as well as other
religious and social societies, and many homes, from which children can
be adopted. These agencies are doing admirable work, but they cannot
do a tenth part of what ought to be done. And the very worst cases, in
which the child most urgently needs protection, often cannot be reached
at all. This problem is too big to be muddled through privately. It is
the concern of the whole nation.

_The first necessary step is to legalise adoption. Until that is done,
nothing can be done._

At present as I have told you, the position is one of very great
danger. The law grants the foster-parents no recognised legal control
over the child. The mother, or her relatives, unless obviously immoral
and unfit persons, may at any time claim back the child.

Even in the most favourable circumstances there is danger, and a
never-ending uncertainty that cuts at the very root of the adopted
relationships. I repeat: neither the foster-parent or the child has
any security. And at any time, and for any reason, the child may be
taken from his home. Directly he (or she) grows up and is able to earn
money, the needy relatives, with an eye on those small earnings or on
the much larger sums squeezable from the foster-parents, may prove an
ever-threatening nuisance. If the foster-parent acts boldly and resists
such claim, the relative may apply for a writ of Habeas Corpus in
the High Court, when (under the Custody of the Children’s Act, 1891)
the case is decided at the discretion of the Court. As a rule, the
interests of the child are considered, and, in this respect, matters
have much improved of late years. But even if the decision is given in
favour of the foster-parents so that the child remains in the home in
which it has been reared and is loved, there is a period of ceaseless
anxiety; and, that the decision will be favourable is certain only when
the character of the claiming relative can be proved to be bad.

_So curious is the law that it is safer to adopt the child of bad or
doubtful parentage (where this can be proved) than the child of good
and respectable people._

The other side of the position has also to be considered. As is
evident, the foster-parents may be bad. This we have seen. And what I
want to emphasise further is that here too the danger threatens the
unprotected child. Just as the law gives no recognised protection to
the good foster-parents, so it affords no protection to the child
against a bad foster-parent.

All the time I am trying to drive into your consciousness the terrible
position of the child that has no legal claims; no kind of safeguard.
He (or, of course, she, and the girl babies are adopted much oftener
than boys) may be adopted simply as playthings, or to satisfy deeply
unconscious instincts of cruelty, or as an investment for the time when
they can earn money. Also they can be cast off at the caprice of their
adopters.

A further and permanent injustice, operative even under happy
conditions and in a good home, arises from the fact that the adopted
child is without rights of inheritance. If his foster parents, however
rich, die intestate, he has no share in the family property. At any
time in his life he may be left penniless and friendless, without
recognition that he belongs to anyone.

Such uncertainty is awful. Try to realise the suffering which it must
bring to the child, ever dogging his footsteps like a menacing shadow.

Our sluggard imaginations must surely be stirred now our attention has
been directed to this gap in our law. I wish that my pen had greater
power to bring home to everyone concerned—and _everyone who cares
or professes to care for the welfare of children is concerned_—the
iniquity of allowing the continuance of conditions that must bring
nothing less than tragedy into the lives of these unfortunate and
unprotected little ones.

This is almost the only country which does not recognise and legalise
adoption: all that needs to be done is to bring our law up to the
standard which prevails in other lands. We alone are neglectful. It
is one of the many social matters concerning children on which Great
Britain has seriously fallen behind the example of its own daughter
States. The United States, Australia and New Zealand have all gone
far ahead of the Mother Country in their legislation in regard to
child adoption. All the forty-eight States of the Union have now Acts
regulating adoption. But perhaps the Model Act is that of Western
Australia, passed in 1891. It provides for the complete and careful
guardianship of all adopted children. The Act has worked admirably,
and with a very few alterations could be adopted to the needs of this
country.

And it must not be thought that all this recognition and protection
of adoption is a new thing, and, as such, possible to dismiss as
unnecessary, belonging to an over-protective and grandmotherly
system of law. Such a belief would be far from the truth. Students
of history know how almost universal was the practice of adoption in
older civilisations. Roman law recognised the custom and adoption
was extremely common. I could give many other examples. Especially
interesting is the custom in India, where among the Hindoos, when a
child is adopted into a new family, it goes through the religious
ceremonies belonging to death before quitting the home in which it was
born, and afterwards goes through the religious ceremonies belonging to
birth on reaching the new home. The old bond is completely severed and
a new social, religious and legal bond created.

I would ask your attention to this wise provision made by one of the
oldest civilisations, which often understood so much more practically
and simply the needs of a social situation.

If the full necessary security is to be given to the practice of
adoption there must clearly be a complete passing over of the duties
and rights of the natural-parents to the adopting parents. Adoption
ought to be undertaken only solemnly and with due understanding of all
the difficulties, and the necessary precautions. The closest enquiries,
in every case, need to be made as to the bona fide intentions and
complete suitability of the adopting parents: guarantees must be given
of their intentions and ability to bring up and care for the child.
It would also be equally necessary, except in exceptional cases of
proved cruelty and unfit parentage, to ascertain the reasons why the
parents—or parent in the case of an illegitimately born child—desired
to give up their rights of guardianship. But when once this has been
done, and any order of adoption made, the parental relationship ought
to be transferred completely from the natural to the adopting parents.

And in the interests of the child, I would have this transference
carried out with the severest restrictions. I would not allow a parent,
or parents, who once gave up the guardianship of the child any rights
of visitation. Such visits, even under the happiest circumstances cause
disturbance, remind the child unceasingly of its difficult position
as an adopted child. They tend to create confusion, with feelings of
dissatisfaction and jealousy; comparison between the old home and the
new home; conflicts between the affection for the adopted-parents
and the very possible drawing back of natural affection for the
real parents.

All ways adoption must be difficult.

Science has shewn us how terribly the future of the child depends on
its early relationships in the home; its relation to its mother, on
whom it depends for the first childish satisfactions, its relations
to its father, to its brothers and sisters. The adopted relationships
can never be quite the same as the natural relationships. We now know
how easily jealousy and unhappiness can arise in the heart of even the
youngest child, and what havoc to the after life these feelings may
bring. If we remember this, we shall realise better the disturbing
emotions likely to be aroused when one parent is lost and replaced by
another. That is why everything possible needs to be done to give to
adopted parenthood the strongest stability. The adoption of a child
ought never to be undertaken lightly. It is, perhaps, the most binding
and the most solemn, and the most fatefully responsible of any human
relationship.

A righteous law of adoption needs to guard the adopted child so that
the voluntary relationship is as binding in every way and as permanent
as the natural relationship. For this reason the adopted child should,
in my opinion, have the same rights of inheritance as all other
children. Nothing short of this can do justice to the adopted child.

We talk a great deal to-day about children and their rights, but
very few of us realise at all practically and fully the change
of attitude, in particular in connection with property and the
rights of inheritances, that are likely to be necessary, if, in all
circumstances, our theories are to be expressed in our daily conduct.

The whole question is complicated and very difficult, there is, indeed,
no easy way out.




LET US PENSION THE MOTHERS.


I was attending a conference to consider the best steps to be taken
to aid mothers and to stop the sacrifice of the lives and health of
little children. All kinds of suggestions were made. We talked much, we
proposed and discussed, but none of us seemed able to agree what ought
to be done.

Then a strong man, an observant lawyer, rose. He spoke with the biting
American twang. His words were few: “Why don’t you pay poor mothers?”

The brilliant simplicity of this question stirred at once our powers of
understanding.

It was Judge Neil who spoke. In brief phrases he told us what had been
done in America. Mother’s pensions, which are in reality children’s
pensions, have been established in most of the forty-eight States of
the Union. They are granted until the children are fourteen, or, in the
case of delicate children, until sixteen. State-appointed supervisors
watch over the welfare of the children to ensure that the money given
is well spent by the mother.

As Judge Neil placed the facts before us, this plan of paying mothers
instead of forcing them to go out as workers, possibly at “sweated”
wages, and then paying other people in an institution to do their work,
seemed so simple that I was filled with wonder that we had not long ago
thought of so easy and obvious a reform. It is strange that it is so
often the most simple things that we never think of doing. I believe it
is because we think of reforms intellectually; we are not human enough
to feel.

Now, it is just Judge Neil’s humanity that set his feet upon the right
way. Listen to the story of how first he came to think of mother’s
pensions:—

In 1911, a poor widow, broken by the burden of supporting her family,
was condemned to have all her five children taken from her.

“Better to shoot her than take away her children.” said Judge Neil. He
then asked how much it would cost to maintain the children in a State
institution.

“The country pays the institution 10 dollars a month for each child,”
was the answer.

“Why not give the 10 dollars to the mother and let her keep her
children?”

Such was Judge Neil’s humane and practical solution of the problem.
Thus the scheme for pensioning mothers was born.

The responsibility of the State for children ill-cared-for is admitted
in most countries. It is, therefore, a question of ways and means, not
a question of high principle, how best to carry out this intention and
prevent child poverty.

Surely grants to good mothers are better than grants to institutions.
Even the best Poor Law schools must have the faults that are inherent
in institutions.

I can hardly express too strongly my own want of faith in “expert
child-trainers.” I have found always that they regard the child mainly,
if not entirely, as something to be improved and instructed on a
definite plan. The “expert” is never human, and a child has need of all
the human treatment it can get.

Every child has absolute need of its mother. All experience shows us
that the home, with its sympathetic relationships of mother and child,
sisters and brothers, cannot be replaced. We must insist on reforms
that will make home life possible.

The child has to accept the arrangements we make; that is why this
question is of such immense importance. If the matter could be fixed by
the will of the children I should have no fear. The child has not lost
the true values of life.

There is another fact to consider—one that will appeal to ratepayers.
Grants to mothers are cheaper than grants to institutions. In the
United States the payment made to a mother works out at about one-third
the cost of maintaining a child in an institution. So we can do the
best thing for the child and its mother and at the same time save our
pockets.




BOY AND GIRL OFFENDERS, AND ADULT MISUNDERSTANDING


Much disturbing evidence on such a grave question as the bad behaviour
and consequent punishment of boys and girls, in institutions, and in
prisons, is made public, from time to time, to rouse the consciousness
of all those who have concern for the welfare of the young. Sometimes
the events recorded are of a more serious character. The attempted
suicides and continued escapes of young prisoners certainly afford a
rather tragic witness of some failure in our reformative efforts. Even
under the Borstal system of prison life—a system that is primarily
intended to be humane and educative, and not brutal and primitive, the
results obtained are far from being satisfactory. We cannot feel that
we are achieving anything like what ought to be done in the difficult,
but necessary, duty of reclaiming these young lives that, for one cause
or another, have fallen to disaster.

If we believe, as believe we must, that the old are responsible for the
young—that the one generation must stand as guardian to the next—this
problem of delinquency is one that we may not thrust aside. It is
bigger than its immediate application in connection with reclaiming the
individual boy or the individual girl: it touches the very deepest of
our duties—our duty to the future. It is for us to ask many questions
of ourselves, and of all those who are in any way connected with the
young; questions to which it is not easy always to find satisfactory
answers.

It is obvious that something is wrong.

I do not wish to harrow you with painful statistics, or by reminding
you of unfortunate incidents in connection with young prisoners that
_you ought not to have forgotten. You would not have forgotten if you
had cared as you ought to care._

I do not deny that “much is being done; that conditions are better
far than they were in the past.” But this does not cover our failures
or lessen our responsibilities. I plead for greater attention to, and
more understanding of, the delinquent child. It is not, and never can
be, a question that can be fixed or finally decided: the child is an
individual; and, in each case, the problem of dealing with him must be
a separate problem. This is certain—only by understanding the child
who fails, _his own difficulties and his own failure_—can we advance.
By this way only can we give aid to these young offenders, who, with
a burden of ancient instincts and uncontrolled impulses, come into
a world filled with undesirable examples, where they have to face
manifold temptations.

Let us try, then, to consider the delinquent boy and girl, bearing
these truths in our thoughts. And first we must acknowledge the
complexity and terrible difficulty of the problem. Delinquency in
the young cannot be explained by obvious superficial causes. The
motivating impulse to naughtiness and bad conduct always lies outside
of consciousness. I mean that the boy or girl who continuously does
wrong, fails altogether in good conduct, whether in a reformatory, in
a prison, or a Borstal institution is acting in this way from a reason
which is deeply hidden, and which they do not themselves understand;
while further, the present misbehaviour is connected with some
experience of the past that now they have forgotten. _They are driven
by this inward urge into rebellion and insubordinate conduct._ And the
help they ought to have is one of re-education, by clearing up what was
wrong in the past, and this help must be given to them by those who are
specially trained to understand.

They cannot, unaided, help themselves. The things they do wrong—the
breaking of rules, the failures in work, the violent conduct, the
attempted escapes—in the vast majority of cases, are a defence against
unhappiness that stalks as a deadly shadow, following their young lives.

_Their treatment is a medical as well as a social and ethical problem.
The young do wrong because their souls are sick._ Such a statement
is not fantastic, it is seriously true. To understand the meaning of
the present bad conduct of anyone, but especially of the delinquent
boy or girl, it is absolutely necessary to find out the motive which
makes them want to behave badly. Always we have to search to find “a
reason why.” To discover, as far as we are able, what it is causing the
rebellion or the bad conduct, we must have wisdom to give up the old
ignorant ideas as to its being possible to cure bad conduct, in any
way that matters, by scoldings, by punishments or, indeed, any kind of
direct attack.

The fault that distresses those in authority in the present must be
regarded as the sign of a hidden conflict that has distressed the child
in the past. It is this conflict, then, that must be discovered and
dealt with. Never in any case can the lazy adult view be accepted that
the delinquent child does wrong because of original sin.

The young do wrong when they suffer, usually through the blunders of
those who are supposed to train them; their faults in behaviour are a
relief for pain they find too intolerable to bear. If the boy or girl
is happy in harmony with his or her world, then that boy or girl is
good.

To find the real cure for this unhappiness of soul is, of course, a
most difficult task. It can be accomplished completely only by those
specially trained in understanding and analysing the child mind. But
much good, and a return to healthy happiness can often be gained, by a
little helpful understanding of the special problems of the individual
boy or girl. It is the educator’s duty to try to pour daylight on the
hidden plague spots of the soul.

This can never be done by cruelty or any form of coercive treatment
which arouses fear—the most deadly enemy to right conduct. The way to
educate the abnormal, the difficult boy or girl, is not to be shocked
or to punish them, but to show them sympathy, directed by knowledge.

Teach these girls and boys that they have failed in good conduct, not
because they are bad or different really from other more fortunate
young people, but because they have been unhappy—ill with feelings of
insecurity, of deficiency, of loneliness, of failure; help them to
understand the causes that have brought about this condition, why they
have felt inferior, been unhappy; and then build up their characters
by giving them new opportunities of finding happiness in their work
and in their play, providing new interests and creating opportunities
for new responsibilities. These young people want kindness and to be
taught to be sociable. Moral conduct is never easy. We all want what we
do want. We surrender our wishes only because we find we satisfy other
desires by so doing. We are praised and rewarded for good conduct and
for preferring to give up to others what we want to do ourselves. And a
very practical lesson in our training of delinquents depends upon this.
The educators must take the greatest possible care that bad conduct
does not give greater pleasure than good conduct. Doing wrong so often
opens for the young the widest and easiest door to gain excitement. If
boys and girls in Borstal institutions and in reformatories are left
unnoticed and never praised when good they quickly feel neglected.
And though they do not recognise these disappointed feelings they act
very strongly in setting them to seek for some kind of relief. And if
allowed to enjoy power when they become rebellious, through the notice
that is bestowed upon them and the upsetting of the usual regime of the
school or the prison workshop, they will continue to indulge in bad
conduct whenever they are bored or, for any reason, crave some form of
emotional relief.

Bad conduct is primitive, infantile conduct, and one of its strongest
characteristics is the tendency to proceed more directly, more
unthinkingly, and more selfishly to the goal of the wishes than is
usually done by the reasonable adult.

The little child wants something, grabs at it, and when it does not at
once get it, screams and breaks into a passion.

Now this is just what is done by the delinquent boy or girl, whose
conduct must be regarded as infantile, frankly selfish, and regulated
only by doing what one wants and getting what one wants. Such conduct
points to a condition of retarded growth; and usually can be traced
back to some mistake in the early training, which has prevented an
adaptation of the character to grown-up conditions, so that the boy or
girl of seventeen or eighteen acts still like the young child of four
or five years of age.

Every child, who is to grow into a successful and happy adult, has to
grow out of this primitive behaviour and to learn social standards
of conduct—to think what other people want and to measure their own
conduct in its relation to others.

Thus the real problem of the education of the delinquent boy or girl
is to help them to grow up. And the very first step is to teach them
to stop thinking about themselves. They have to learn to turn outwards
towards others and away from their own wishes and hidden desires, that
are the real cause of their unhappiness and bad conduct.

And for this reason, even if for no other, there could be no possible
form of treatment as harmful, and also I may add so silly, as that
adopted (as still so often it is) in reformatory institutions of
placing insubordinate prisoners in solitary confinement, even sometimes
with the use of irons. No other form of punishment could be more
disastrous to a boy or girl. To permit this cruelty is assuredly to
increase the faults of character that are the cause of the bad conduct.
By such insane punishment the young offenders are separated from their
companions, perhaps bound, and left without occupation to sit alone,
brooding over their unhappiness; their thoughts necessarily fixed upon
themselves. They cannot fail by means of this unhealthy process to be
sent more backwards into childish and bad behaviour—driven further away
from adult and social conduct.

Few of us, I think, understand sufficiently how continuous and almost
unspeakably hard, are the efforts that the delinquent has to make in
order to achieve re-education. He is overwhelmingly conscious (however
much he may seem to be indifferent) of his own inferiority. All such
boys or girls, who frequently become aggressive and insubordinate,
need to be treated in such a way as will increase their confidence
in themselves. This may seem contradictory, but it is true. If the
young offenders are punished and discouraged the trouble from which
they suffer is sure to increase by making stronger the sense of
self-depreciation. Too often the devastating feelings are driven back
into the obscure places of the mind—the unseen office of the directing
forces that in secret issue the supreme commands that control conduct.
It is in order the better to overcome the truths that would stab him
about himself if he recognised them, that such a wrong-doer becomes
aggressively self-assertive, indulges in foolish acts and marked
insubordination. Such boys and girls are without courage, and all their
pride boils up behind a maimed and timid character.

The important thing to remember is that, though bad conduct comes from
what seems insubordination, “the characteristics of bad conduct” arise
from the state of the boy’s or girl’s mind, and that state depends very
much on the treatment he (or she) receives.

If you cure the particular fault for which the punishment was
inflicted, and the boy or girl loses his (or her) soul, you have done
more harm than good. But the real position is worse than that, for
if you hurt the young soul, you give up for ever the opportunity of
re-educating the boy or girl for good conduct.




NEW WAYS OF TEACHING CHILDREN

UNBOUNDED FREEDOM AND SOME DRAWBACKS


I remember once seeing in “Punch” a picture that has always retained
in my memory the vividness of the first impression. It is a long time
ago, yet I can see it now exactly as I saw it then. A father, at a
children’s Christmas party, was personating a bear. Filled with the
adult’s joy of being allowed to be a child, he was roaring loudly, as
he crawled upon the floor covered with a woolly hearth-rug. So much for
the father. Certainly he was enjoying it. But what about the children.
What was their view of this performance?

They were all looking bored. Even the tiny ones shewed no enthusiasm.
In the corner of the room as far withdraw as space permitted was a
group of young school boys, very stiffly correct in Etons and immense
white collars. They were disgusted. One, who had ostentatiously turned
his back on the performing father, was plainly angry. Even his back
was eloquent of disapproval and gloom surrounded him. His companion,
standing next to him, attempted to cheer him in this way: “Never mind,
Brown major, you know its not _your_ fault if your pater is a blooming
fool!”

It is, indeed, a different aspect of the situation. The son ashamed of
the father! The young generation condemning the old! It is fitting that
we should take notice and remember the lesson that is taught.

For this picture of appraising youth carries a very real moral that
should be considered by those modern educational enthusiasts, who are
always talking about amusing the child—as if that were the one thing
which mattered. There is no subject, I believe, on which greater
nonsense is talked than on this one of interesting children. Personally
I am sceptical whether children are ever greatly interested in the
entertainments that the adult provides for their amusement. What they
find interesting are the things they provide for themselves. That is
one reason why there must be so great an element of falsity in modern
educational theories, which aim at making lessons so interesting that
they become like play.

It cannot be done.

Much of this kind of talk sounds admirable from the point of view of
the adult, but what I always want to know is the view taken by the
child—by the boy or the girl. I do not think they are quite _so fond
of being amused_ as we are apt to believe. Nor do I think they can
be, or indeed, ought to be, _interested_ (which is the same really as
being amused) _to adult orders_. I _mean_ that to be truly effective
and liberating to the child, this interest must be dependent on what he
has to do for himself. The work cannot be done for him. That is why I
am afraid of the incursion into the schoolroom of the too anxious and
amusement-providing spirit of the home. It causes too much indirect
interference. It supplies too many appliances. It is over-occupied with
arrangements and the smoothing away of difficulties. In a word it does
not leave the child sufficiently to himself to learn his own lessons,
to satisfy his own needs in his own way.

_It proposes, of course, to do this, but it is just here that enormous
mistakes occur._

I can fancy a group of boys and girls who, if they said what they
really felt about their own education and our ceaseless experiments and
efforts to make their lessons interesting and more acceptable to them,
would pity us as fools.

The point of view of the child (also of the boy and the girl, but
especially, I think, of the boy) is always so utterly different from
the point of view of the adult. You see they are judging the situation
personally, while we are judging it vicariously and ethically.

The ever-pressing idea of the educationalist to-day is to give the
child freedom. But what is freedom? That is a question to which we
have not yet found an answer. Do we consider sufficiently, if what
means freedom to us, really gives freedom to the young? And a second
question—Are we not, perhaps, in our nervous over-anxiety, imposing
upon them something they do not want?

There is a great deal said about self-development and the necessity of
the teacher respecting the child’s individuality. We are continually
hearing of interesting experiments made in free schools and are told of
children who, even when quite young, if left to choose their own tasks,
will be so interested in writing, in reading, and also in arithmetic,
that they will not want to give up their work even when school-hours
are over!

Still I am unconvinced. I would rather have the boy or the girl waiting
in eagerness for the bell to ring to free them from the school.

We are apt to over-estimate our grown-up power. We do this because we
like to do it. It flatters adult egotism. We find a delicious sense of
power in realising ourselves in so many new ways as potters to mould
the clay of the child’s mind. I often feel that we worry about this
question of education much more to please ourselves than to help the
young.

But this continuous occupation with the child is bad for the child,
however gratifying it is to ourselves. By the provision of too many
appliances and “helps to learn,” and by continual experiments that are
too often changed, we tend to check creative originality, and thereby
we destroy the interest we are labouring to stimulate. It is better
for the child if we are less occupied with his needs. If we do not
provide him with interests he will find them for himself. In this case
they will mean more to him—do more for him. I dislike exceedingly all
contrivances that make things easy. I believe the child dislikes them
too. That is one reason why he tires so soon of all the appliances
you provide. They do not stimulate interest and effort, except quite
temporarily, indeed, they destroy both.

This applies to children’s play quite as much as to their schoolwork.
Most children to-day are given too many and too elaborate toys. Perhaps
nothing is more mentally destructive. The child will invent his own
amusements. He wants to fight giant lamp-posts and to go to sea in an
inverted table. To fasten his imagination to your adult suggestions is
to destroy his vigour.

Know then this truth. You can teach the child lessons and you can
discipline him by your grown up authority, _but you cannot by your
ready-made devices successfully interest him or give him freedom_.
That he must find for himself. He cannot develop fully and be reliant,
unless by himself, and very often _against your will_, he travels on
his own road.

There is the very greatest delusion about this idea of freedom in the
school room. And it is open to question whether the children in the
free school, left mainly to choose their own tasks and take their own
time in performing them, are really freer, in any true sense, than the
disciplined and directed children in the master-ruled schools who have,
in my experience, much better opportunities in the out-of-school hours
of developing personality. The discipline of the school does help them
by giving them more rest. I think they are less influenced by their
teacher. For always there is, and must be, whatever the educational
plan and however free from apparent compulsions, behind the pupil the
will of the teacher indirectly, if not directly, guiding. And I am not
sure if this indirect coercion of suggestion is not worse, from the
point of view of the child, than the old-fashioned methods of direct
command. I will even go further and state my belief that its claims are
heavier, and bind the boy or girl more permanently in the prison of
obedience.

For one thing, such indirect coercion does close for the pupils the
splendid liberating door of being rebellious.

I can still remember the excitement and real health-giving joy I
obtained when, as a child, I once out-witted my instructor and escaped
from my lessons, which I heartily detested, to go to a fair we had all
been forbidden to visit. There was a glorious fat woman, and a man who
swallowed swords! Wonderful! And there was a delicious sweet in a long
roll of twisted pink and white, with inside a picture of Roger, the
Claimant. It was the time of the Tichbourne trial. If you could find
one tiny piece of the sweet without the picture, a whole immense bar,
much bigger than those which were ordinarily sold, was to be forfeited
and given to you free! Think of it! The possibility! The excitement!
Every penny I had was spent—and it was worth it! Yes, a thousand times
worth it! Of course, what I did brought punishment. For I had to
confess my misdeeds. Those sweets made me very sick. What did that
matter? I did gain the joy and liberty I was seeking. This was one of
the really educating experiences of my childhood.

Seriously, I am deeply afraid that to-day in our very eagerness to help
children, we may often be acting in an exactly opposite direction as a
hinderance to their self-development, and future happiness. I believe
we are trying to achieve something that is impossible.

One thing I am certain we ought to accept. It is the inescapable
barrier between the generations—between the parents and the children,
the teachers and the pupils. The young ought to be separated from the
old. I think this biological fact is forgotten by many advocates of
freedom and new ideals in education.

I believe also that the young want—and by “want” I mean both desire and
need—the direction of the old. They want the authority that marks the
division between the two generations, for this opens up opportunities
to rebel. Instinctively they know they can find more liberty under
authority, than when left with the pressing burden, often too heavy for
their young inexperience, of deciding at school, as well as at home,
almost everything for themselves.

Nor do I very much believe in the over-worrying conscientiousness of
the modern teachers. Again I must insist upon this. The increasing
pre-occupation with the child; the constant trying of different
educational experiments, is almost certain to exercise an adverse
influence. There may be a tyranny of solicitude and kindness that is
harder to bear than scoldings and punishments. To me there is something
mournful in this chorus of uncertainty, in which it is not difficult
to detect the poverty of our faith. It tells a tale of infirmity both
of life and purpose. So small a thing staggers us. We are without
confidence in ourselves or in life. Why is this?

Do we, I often ask myself, know at all, what the child wants to find
the freedom that gives liberty to the young soul—the only freedom that
matters? How can we give the gifts of life unless we have ourselves
firmer confidence? If anything can destroy the soul of a child, it is
want of security. Our irresolution is our great danger. That is why so
often our efforts are barren. It is a sign of a nervous disorder of the
soul. We seek to gain from outside things what we should find within
ourselves. And the child must suffer. For the child is so helplessly
dependent, so inarticulate, so unable to express his own feelings and
deeper needs.

There is still the most amazing blindness in regard to the effect of
adult conduct on the child. I know of one small boy who was taught in
a free school, where the idea of authority was held in abhorrence.
Yet this boy of eight was found one night sobbing bitterly. His
mother questioned him. It appeared he had been idle at school, rude,
and generally naughty. He had not been scolded, and, of course, not
punished. He had been reasoned with and told the foolishness of
behaving in this way. Apparently all ought to have been well. Yet it
was just in this reasonable gentleness of his headmaster that his
trouble rested. He knew he had been naughty. He _wanted_ the punishment
that would have wiped out his own consciousness of wrong doing. He
sobbed out his complaint to his mother, “if only he (his teacher) had
punished me or been cross and nasty I could have forgotten. It would
have been all over. But now I keep on thinking about it, and I feel
_all twisted up inside_.”

Now this young boy understood his own needs much better than did his
master, who was making the very common mistake of judging the child by
himself. The needs of the child are entirely different from the needs
of the adult. The child wants security, he wants firmness, he desires
authority, he even wants punishment.

Let me tell you another story to help to bring home these forgotten
truths. This time it was a little girl of the tender age of six years,
who had done wrong, was rude and very unkind to her governess. The
occasion was a birthday party. Over-excitement was the outside cause
of her bad behaviour. No one minded the rude remarks except the child
herself. We all, including the insulted governess, understood the
reason. Our mistake was, we understood too well, or rather, we judged
from the outside and from our grown-up point of view, forgetting that
it was not that of the child. We all tried to comfort the little one’s
distress, assuring her we understood and knew she did not mean what she
had said. In vain. The child would not be comforted. I can never forget
the fatalism of her remark, “It does not matter that Miss —— and all of
you forgive me, what matters is that I _did_ it.”

Again it was the child, not we—the grown-ups, who understood the
situation as it really was. And what I want to impress upon you, is
the suffering unwittingly imposed on both these children. If they
had been punished they would not have felt this paralysing sense of
wrong doing—a suffering of the soul, fitting perhaps for the adult,
but not for the child. With punishment or even with scolding, the
penalty would have been paid, and the relief would have been gained of
self-forgiveness—a relief so much more necessary to happiness than the
forgiveness of others.

Of course, it may be argued that morally such self-accusation which
does follow from this method of adult forgiveness, with its sentimental
treatment of wrong doing, is good for children. I do not think so.
Certainly it makes them suffer—suffer intolerably and to an extent
that few adults are sufficiently discerning to realise. But the burden
placed on the untried, unhardened and sensitive child-soul is, I am
certain, too heavy for them to bear safely at this stage of their
psychic growth. Punishment would, in almost all cases, be far easier
and more acceptable. It would also be far healthier. There is always
the gravest danger in placing the immature child in any position that
forces an emotional response in advance of the stage of development
which has been reached. We have to see these problems as the child
feels them, not as we think about them with our grown-up experience and
adult deadness.




DIFFICULTIES AND MISTAKES IN SEX EDUCATION


To the theoretical teacher or parent eager to reform the world on
paper, it may seem easy to introduce sex education into the nursery
training of the home, and into the curriculum of our schools. It
appears a comparatively easy matter to tell the little child the truth
about its own body, and as it grows older, to give carefully prepared
lessons about plants and animals, which shall lead it slowly and
beautifully into the way of knowledge.

Text books have been written, pamphlets officially issued, schemes
drawn up for home and school instruction, and rules laid down—new
finger-posts to right conduct, whereby the younger generation may
be enlightened and (as we hope) by this means saved from making the
mistakes that we ourselves have made.

I wish it were as simple as this. That sex instruction could be taken
from books.

Of late various attempts have been made to focus attention on this
aspect of the question or on that; we have been told how this teaching
should be given, and with still greater assurance how it should not
be given; this must be done and that must not be done; this said and
that left unsaid. And groups of earnest-minded parents and teachers, in
almost every town, have met together to discuss and decide debatable
points; lecturers have been applied for, and their utterances have
been listened to as a new gospel; yet I venture to think that, as in
all other experimental and debatable questions, the very multitude of
counsel and the earnestness that is expended, indicates the uncertainty
of our knowledge and the doubtful value of many of our affirmations.

I find a tendency amongst most grown-ups, and especially teachers
and advanced parents who ought to know better, to place too firm a
reliance on their own power to educate the young in sex. I myself
have done this. Like those drowning in deep water where they cannot
swim, we have clutched at any plank of hope. You see so many of the
old planks—religion, social barriers, chaperones, home restrictions,
and so many more, on which our parents used to rely, have failed us;
been broken in our hands by the vigorous destroying grasp of the young
generation; and, therefore, we have clutched with frantic fingers at
this new fair-looking life-raft, in pursuit of the one aim, to protect
our children.

But will it save them? I doubt if it will except in a limited and very
different way from what is usually accepted. We cannot help the young
very far or deeply by any of our teaching. Not only do they want their
own experience, not ours, but it is right for them to have it. The urge
of adolescence carries them away out of our detaining hands. And I
think it may be well that at once we realize and acknowledge the very
narrow limits of our power.

Thus I have nothing new or very striking to bring to the solution
of this difficult problem. I shall endeavour, however, to look at
the matter broadly and practically, and attempt to indicate in what
direction, as it seems to me, further progress may be made at the
present stage of our very faulty knowledge.

One of the most disturbing features that we have to recognise in
relation to the child is the very early age at which sex manifests
itself. It was formerly supposed that the sex-life began at the age of
puberty. Nothing is more untrue. Every child is born with instincts
and desires—feelings of love, of hate, of jealousy, which furnish the
motives of conduct, and are accompanied by physical manifestations of
pleasure or discomfort which express themselves, often in a veiled way,
as wishes and cravings, that find relief in action, and must therefore
be yoked either to some burden of utility or to some car of vanity.

It should be noted, however, that the word sexual is somewhat
ambiguous, because I want to stretch it to include the very germs that
afterwards blossom into the adult sex-life. The little girl with her
doll is maternal, and the boy with a tin sword is showing the crudest
manifestation of the male protective instinct.

The baby whenever it enjoys the satisfaction of realising its infantile
wants gurgles with delight. “Every nurse, and every mother who tends
her child herself knows this, and recognises as a necessary task in the
training of the child, almost from the day of its birth, the winning of
it away from this egocentric concentration on its own body.”[2]

We are always trying not to admit that we have to recognise in relation
to sex the very early age at which it manifests itself. We do not
believe this, because we dislike to believe it. Our fear causes us to
neglect in a quite wrong way the deeply affective results of the early
childish emotions.

To the uninstructed eye, early desires and feelings connected with sex
are often so unlike their final form that they pass unrecognised. But
the mother who has eyes to see and knowledge to understand knows that
the child can hide no secret. When the lips speak not, the faces in
twitching mouth and blinking eyes; the hands, in telling gestures; the
biting nails; the sucking thumb; the shuffling feet; the toes that are
played with and sucked—all these utter the truth; and betrayal escapes
out of every nervous movement of hands, and feet, and face.

We will not see and acknowledge the presence of these early emotions
because we want to see the child an angel. We cannot surrender the
picture of childhood as a period of delightful ignorance and innocence.

The very reverse is the truth. The child has brought with it much from
more primitive times; just in the same way as its body still shows
traces of earlier developments in life, so its emotions, its instincts,
its wishes and desires, revert back, in many particulars, to lower
stages of growth. Always the child has to fight its way upwards, and
indeed, it has no easy task to find and keep the right path, in its
short journey of discovery to reach from the savagery of the babe to
the level of a civilised social man or woman. If we do not help it, the
way becomes doubly hard and often the path is lost or, in other words,
the savage triumphs.

We are now in a better position to answer the question, so much
debated, as to the age at which the sex education of the child should
begin. Instead of this being a matter that can be put off until the
child is older, and the angel innocence has been sullied by contact
with an evil and ugly world, it becomes overwhelmingly important that
_no time whatever should be lost_. Every effort must be made to educate
from the very hour of birth these primitive instincts, which, though
permissible in the savage and the little child, are wholly wrong if
allowed to remain active in the later adult years. Delay is fatal. Time
lost now never can be regained: mistakes made cannot be put right. A
wrong direction may most easily be given by a careless act. I cannot
emphasise this too strongly, or too often. _The character, the life
history and the entire fate of every child is fixed in the nursery._

The mistake we have been making for so long is in regarding this
instruction in sex as something we can impart to children or with-hold
from them; a subject we may teach or not teach; enlightenment we may
give to them or conceal from them. This view is entirely erroneous.
In one sense, the whole matter really lies outside of our wills. Sex
education cannot be omitted by any parent or any teacher from the
training of any child, for it is given _by not being given_, just as
surely as the other way about. There is no escape for anyone who has to
do with a child.

You will see what I mean. It is not the good and wise lessons you may
give, of nicely arranged explanations, with flower illustrations or
stories of the mating of birds and animals; still less is it warnings
or goody-goody talks about purity; nor is it any kind of formal or even
conscious instruction that will have the true moulding influence on the
character and emotional state of the child; but what most influences
him, or in other words, teaches him, and helps or hinders him, is
the peculiarly affective state—I mean, the emotional attitude—which
usually is totally unknown to the parents and educators, and is also
quite incomprehensible to the child himself. It is all the things
that the grown-ups are trying hardest to hide from the children and
perhaps also covering away from themselves that are the real directing
forces in their character. The concealed enmity, or even small
disharmonies between the parents, the repressed tempers, the strangled
temptations, the secret longing of one or other parent, the miseries
that are hidden—all these inevitably arouse a response in the children,
which acting continuously and unconsciously bring them to a state
corresponding with that of the parents. Their shame and want of joy in
sex will become the children’s shame and want of joy; their unhappiness
in love will be the children’s unhappiness; their most hidden wishes
will escape to create disharmonies in these young and tender souls.

The parents, and especially the mother, impress deeply into the
child’s being the seal of their characters, and the more sensitive and
mouldable the child the deeper is the impression. Take, for instance,
the only or favourite child, who suffers under an anxious excess of
tenderness, so that his love is so fixed on the mother, that not only
does he become restless with too heavy a burden of emotional stress,
and often really ill, but in later life he has the greatest difficulty
in establishing his own character, freeing himself from the mother’s
influence, or finding his own love-mate. Again, in the exact opposite
position, there is the neglected and unwanted child, who, missing his
rightful possession of love, suffers from a sense of inferiority, which
dark and hindering shadow dogs his footsteps through life, finding a
positive expression in shyness and incapacity for action, or a negative
expression in bombastic and disagreeable self-assertion. So I might
continue with countless examples. Adult traits can, in almost all
cases, be traced back to the child’s early experiences in connection
with its parents and in its home.

The child is like a flower, and the banks where it grows are its
world—its home and the friends with whom it comes in contact; the sky
above is the surrounding love on which it is dependent, and to which
it looks up as the flower to the sun for gladness and for life. What
I mean is this: the child has desires and impulses of its own, but
it reflects the changing needs and atmosphere of the small world in
which it lives, and is terribly dependent on that world. It is forming
and selecting a character. It very largely tries what the effect is
of different kinds of conduct—different characters. The child does
not itself know what it is or would wish to be. Whenever there is, as
often there must be, a mistake made, a wrong step taken—a conflict
inevitably occurs, and must find some quick response in childish
naughtiness; otherwise dullness and unhappiness will arise; and this,
if continued, will tend to bring the dangerous condition of the
repressed and introverted child.

We have established now that the love-life of the child starts at
a very early age; it begins in the home, and I want to investigate
this love-life. To do this we must examine with some care the child’s
emotional relationships to the members of his family.

These relationships are not as amicable or peaceful as at first sight
would appear. At a very early age jealousy as well as love stirs in
the baby’s soul. This may surprise you. But I would ask you for a
moment to consider the baby’s position. The child is in a small shut-up
world with its mother. At first she occupies all its life. She is
the earliest love object and of supreme importance in the infantile
constellation. Everything starts from her. She is the source of
nutrition and as such the first object towards which the hunger-wish is
directed. She is also the supplier of warmth, of comfort, of rest—the
personification of shelter and happiness—the starting point of all
those interests of the child which lie outside its own body. Who can
wonder at the child’s possessive feelings in relation to its mother.
But we have seen already, in an earlier essay, how the superfluous
father comes as an intruder into this mother-child circle. And it
is in this way jealousy begins to awaken, at a very early age, and
sometimes is almost unbelievably active in the baby soul. For these
feelings will increase if the baby is a boy, and the love of the mother
may grow to great intensity, which coupled with the jealousy of the
father may work great evil, especially if the mother is unwise, too
tenderly solicitous, too possessive in her love, herself neurotic.
In the case of the girl the position is different. The baby fixation
upon the mother is, as a rule, relieved with growth, as a part of the
love-fund is transferred to the father. Sometimes this does not happen,
especially when the jealousy of the little girl is roused, usually by a
brother or sister more loved by the mother than herself. Then, indeed,
a fixation happens, either in a too passionate tenderness for the
mother, which, persisting acts as an insurmountable hindrance in the
later life in preventing the normal out-going of love to a member of
the opposite sex. I know of one such case and it may make my meaning
plainer if I tell it to you. A little girl was born in a home where
there was already a brother, passionately loved by a too good mother.
The little girl soon felt, for no one feels so quickly as a little
child, that the brother had a place of greater importance than herself.
She did not hate outwardly this brother, had she done this all might
have been well, as she would have gained relief in expression. She
developed the usual device of the unhappily jealous child and took to
phantasy making—pretending that she had another mother, or, at other
times, that she was doing some wonderful deed, being very clever, very
good, very beautiful, so as to gain the love and admiration of her
mother. This was the inner life of make-believe. The outer life was one
of continuous nervous trouble, which culminated in St. Vitus’s Dance.
What is, however most interesting, is the later love-life and the
startling way it reflects this early emotional conflict. This child is
now a woman nearing thirty, very charming, very nice-looking; but she
is utterly unable to settle on her love-mate. Engagement has followed
engagement, in each case the lover has been discarded for no adequate
reason. In all other connections of life capable and good, she behaves
in her love affairs with a capricious unkindness, very difficult to
pardon if one did not understand.

It may be worth while to refer to another case known to me. Two
daughters, with a mother and father between whom there was trouble,
the father having an affection for another woman. Though the trouble
was most carefully hidden from the little girls it formed the decisive
factor in their lives. It is not clear to me whether the love-object
was the father, though I think that this was so. It was, however,
the mother who was, as, indeed, usually she is, the central figure
in this nursery drama. Both children suffered jealousy, probably of
the lady loved by the father, transferred to the mother. The effect
was directly opposite on each daughter. The elder, stronger and more
forceful charactered girl developed a passionate rebellion against the
mother, a specially sweet and long-suffering woman, of so violent and
unreasonable character that she could not live at home; while the other
child was the absolute type of the perfect daughter, self-sacrificing
and passionately loving. But why this case is interesting is that it
was the good child who suffered while the bad child triumphed. The
rebellious daughter was able to establish her own adult life, to work
successfully and to marry happily; the dutiful daughter lost her own
power to live and to love, and was not liberated even by the death
of the mother. I would ask you to note this very specially as it is
exceedingly important. A too great devotion and anxious excess of
tenderness on the part of any one, but especially on the part of a
child to a parent, covers always, and even under the most improbable
circumstances, as when it appears that there is the closest sympathy
and harmony of will, an intense hostile tendency. And because vice
will not be choked by virtue, this over submissive state is much more
dangerous and likely to destroy the springs of life than open hostility.

We have much less need to be afraid of the future for the rebellious,
even the unkind and ungrateful child, than for the good and devoted
child who apparently knows no will but ours, and lives in outward
perfect submission. Every parent who is wise will recognise such a
state as one of the greatest danger, and at any cost to herself will
separate herself from the child. Mind, I do not mean send the child
away. That plan may, indeed, be tried, but often, especially with
sensitive children, the absence will but forge the fetters firmer.
Something like this happens whenever a child who goes to school, is
continuously homesick and becomes ill, not necessarily with a specified
illness, but grows nervous, fails in work and in play. Such a mother
has before her, perhaps the hardest task in parenthood. She has to take
the child home and dissipate and send from herself the over-tender
love, accepting in its place the rebellious hatred that it covers. Does
she fail in this task of sacrifice, made necessary, remember, by some
early mistake in the management of the child, she is simply using up
for herself the energy of love, which her child ought to have to use
for its own life.

I trust these two cases will have made plainer to you the kind of
difficult problems that have to be met by parents. I do not think there
is any family where they are not present. There are many variations,
and the strength of the difficulty as well as the permanent nature of
the harm suffered by the child, depends almost wholly on the wisdom
and the knowledge of the mother, and, even more, on the extent to
which she has been able to understand her concealed wishes and her
own love-history from her childhood’s days and free herself from its
heritage. You will see, I think, without my waiting to point out how
complex the position is, and how hard is the task of the mother to
guide the early emotional life of her children. It is obvious how
easily mistakes may be made.

Hardly less difficult is the position of the father, who is at once
the intruder in the family and the supporter of it. To the child, in
the ordinary home, he is the final authority. He occupies the position
of a god or a ruler. He is feared and rebelled against, also he is
reverenced. Any omission of these qualities, and especially the last,
is fatal to the child. Without this father reverence, and in absence
of his needed authority, there arises an arrogant disposition that
controls all the later character. As has been recognised by all modern
psychologists, there is much of the childish attitude of the boy to
his father in the later relations of the follower to his ruler, of the
worshipper to his god, of the schoolboy to his school-master.

Every boy looks forward to the day when he can escape the rule of the
father and himself usurp his power. I think you will find here the
secret spring of all later rebellion against authority, either in the
boy or in the man. I must give another warning. Again, it is when these
childish feelings of rebellion, jealousy and hate are hidden, and work
in the child’s soul without his knowledge, that the greatest harm is
done.

In this connection, I may recount the case of a boy who grew out of
babyhood shewing unusual affection for his step-father. He was also too
much attached to his mother—being in that most unfortunate position
of an only and too-much-considered child—and in consequence suffered
from strongly jealous feelings towards the step-father. In this way
a conflict was aroused between love and hate, and serious nervous
symptoms arose. The origin of the trouble was first discovered at about
ten years, when the boy developed a very passionate hatred against God.
He was overheard one day swearing on his toy sword to devote his life
to killing God. As he had not been brought up in an over-religious
home, and had hardly ever been taken to Church, this vehement hatred,
which continued for some time, was noticed as unusual. Now the
specialist consulted about the nervous symptoms at once found in this
God-hatred a projection of the very common boyish hatred to the father.
The parents learnt that this was a sign of health, an effort the boy
was making to rid himself of an unbearable inward trouble.

I would emphasise the necessity of parents having the right knowledge
and the love that will enable them to recognise what is important in
the development of character. Too little attention is given by parents
to the spontaneous utterances of children: it is these that will give
the clue to what is troubling the child. Questions never get direct
and real answers. It is what the child brings out unconsciously that
should be noted; his wishes hidden, as a rule, under some symbol,
that the parent unaided, may find very difficult to interpret. We are
too apt—and in this mothers are the worst sinners—to consider their
children as unthinking beings. Always, I believe, children know more
than we credit to them. This is true, in particular, of all emotional
states. As I have tried to make plain, it is these emotions acting
and interacting in connection with the home relations which are of
lasting importance. Mothers who even in the nursery overforce the
emotional growth of their little ones, with the unceasing demands of an
over-demonstrative and unhealthy tenderness; fathers, who, themselves
too arrogant for power, allow their boys and girls no independent
possession of their own lives—such parents are the destroyers of their
children. Their thoughtlessness and ignorance create problems that are
tragedies of pain to children, and leave them marred, and often maimed,
for their conflict with life.

I am prepared for an objection. You may some of you be thinking that
this picture I have drawn for you of nursery tragedies is coloured
from my imagination and without sufficient relation to truth. “Little
children,” you may be saying, “cannot feel these devastating adult
passions. You are projecting on to them evils created by your own
diseased mind.” And you turn back to your “angel innocence” belief,
which must be true, at any rate, you are convinced in the case of your
own child.

But may I tell you this: you must not come to these problems of the
child with an already fixed conviction that they do not exist; because
this may well be, not because they are not there—active even in your
own nursery—but because you shut your eyes determined not to see them.
You think this about their not being present, because you want to think
it, not because it is true. Also it is very easy even for the wisest
parent to be led astray; for the child is the most accomplished actor,
and is always hiding its real self from you.

You see the child has truly a very hard part to play, a part it can lay
down only when no grown-ups are by. In surroundings very opposed to its
own desires or its primitive needs, while still a savage in emotions,
it has to pretend to be what you think it is, to do what you think it
ought to do, and like what you think it ought to like. It has filled
me often with wonder and admiration to see the really brilliant way
in which even the youngest children play up to the angel-role forced
upon them by grown-ups. Much naughtiness and many violent unexplained
tempers are really a breakdown in this part. The right cue is forgotten
at the right moment, or the correct entrance is missed. And I feel it
very necessary to emphasise to you that the naughty child is not so
much being naughty as being himself. He rushes at you with a knife, not
because he is in a temper, but rather the temper is the liberating key
which allows his real desire to kill you to break through the barricade
of civilised desires that you are building around him. And it is very
necessary for the grown-up to understand the intense satisfaction of
creative strength which the child gains by this breaking out of his
real self—a satisfaction that is greatly marred, it is true, and even
turned to pain, by the consciousness of knowing he has broken adult
rules of behaviour, been a naughty boy and grieved you. Always there
is this conflict going on between his primitive egocentric desires and
the demands of the adult world in which he has to learn to live. It is
this conflict, and his success and failure in it, which determines his
growth. More and more he has to learn to give up his own desires and
subordinate his own will. Yet, I am not sure if his repentence, when he
fails, is altogether good for him. Certainly, if it is excessive, and
if it occurs too frequently, it weakens the force of life. And it is
most urgent of all to remember that the parent, or nurse, or teacher,
by constantly requiring from the uncivilised child the standard of
conduct right for the civilised adult may, and most frequently does,
produce a strain which turns the creative force of life back upon
itself. It is ever thus in life when we draw back too hastily or too
much coerced, from any spontaneous expression of emotion; the energy
gathered for the direct expression flows back impotent. I believe that
many a creative artist is destroyed in the civilising process of the
child being turned into the good boy or girl.

And this brings me to a question of the most urgent importance to all
parents and teachers who attempt to guide the emotional development
of a child; to go slowly, and never to force an outward practice of
virtue from the child, if that particular stage of virtue has not been
reached. We do not expect the child to read until it has learnt to
read, nor to calculate and work sums before it understands the use of
figures; we do not expect it to walk until it has stumbled and fallen
many times, nor to use its tiny hands with precision until it has
broken many objects. Why then should we expect it to be good without
learning to be good? And especially, I ask, why should we demand a
standard of emotional behaviour much in advance of anything to which we
ourselves have attained?

For in truth every child has a twisted and most difficult path to
travel in order to reach the standard of conduct expected by the adult
world. Few parents realise at all the harm that so readily may be done,
from any over-hastening on the road to virtue, to the child, sensitive,
responsive to every suggestion, most liable to injury; who is always
balanced between the desire to be a dirty, little savage, like himself,
or a clean well-behaved person, like a grown-up. For what gives every
adult so tremendous a hold over the child is his never ceasing desire
to push forward to a stage above what he is at. Always he is pulled in
two directions, forward to effort and good conduct and the real world
of action and of grown-ups, and backward towards ease and self-pleasing
and the dream-world of the child, in which he thinks only of what he
wants himself. If we hurry him too much there will be a regression:
the uncivilised trait that has not been got rid of by experience of
its uselessness and voluntarily been cast aside, will be thrust down
deep into the psyche, where its unrealised power sends up primitive and
uncivilised wishes, which will certainly mar the adult life, even if
they do not wreck it.

It is not from sheer “contrariness” or “nastiness” that children
develop “bad habits,” that they pick noses, bite nails, stammer, and
other much worse things, or later are too shy or too boisterously
self-assertive, or develop illness and morbid fears.[3] Such symptoms
may be replacements of infantile curiosities and interests which were
denied their satisfaction by the mother’s warning, often harmful,
however gently given, “that is not nice, darling.” In particular harm
is caused by a too early checking of the child’s delight in messy
things, making mud pies, playing with water, using hands instead of
knife and fork, and other nasty messy habits. The particular habit may,
and usually does, disappear, but the checked and thwarted energy is
still potent and at any time in after life may re-appear clothed in a
fresh dress of concealment.

All that can be done with the bad habit is to turn it into new
directions of rightful energy. As, for instance, the messy child should
be given heaps of plasticine or wax, and sand to play with. Similarly
with the desire to play with water: this is a symbolic action by which
the young child frees itself from some inner hidden trouble. I know
of one case where a child until quite an advanced age, always after a
relapse into bad and primitive behaviour, had a curious way of blowing
water through long tubes. The result was highly satisfactory and never
failed to bring the child back to good and social behaviour. As an
example of the terrible harm that may be done by an over fastidious
niceness of behaviour, I may cite a rather curious case I happen to
know, where a mother, was so afraid of nakedness, and disliking the
sight of her own body, that she actually put on a bathing dress when
she had a bath even in the privacy of her own bath room. This mother
had a son whose adult life was rendered miserable and his happiness to
a great extent injured, by horrible and haunting obscene visions. Here,
in very truth, the cleanness of the mother became the uncleanness of
the son.

I must hasten on. I am bound to leave out much that might well be
noticed, for the subject is very difficult and very wide. I hope,
however, I have made clear to you the following truths:—

(1) That any education of children in sex that is to result in success
in the after life cannot be fulfilled by the imparting of set and
fixed lessons on sex-enlightenment, given either in the home or in the
school. (2) That this education is concerned with the entire emotional
life of the child. (3) That it is continuous and unceasing. (4) And
that it is a work of such complexity that for even the wisest mistakes
are certain and success uncertain.

Above all else, I am sure we have to avoid an easy and lazy optimism.

And with such perils awaiting the incautious, is it any wonder that the
chief element of safety often is a negative one—non-interference? By
non-interference the two chief factors leading to emotional disturbance
and ill-health may almost certainly be avoided; thwarted wishes are not
thrust back, and repressed to work harm in the psyche, causing mental
and bodily ill-health which often does not manifest itself for many
years; development is not hurried on too rapidly, so that necessary
primitive stages of growth are omitted or hastened over too quickly,
causing, not infrequently, in the later years of life, a regression
backwards to primitive and uncivilised conduct.

When interference becomes necessary it must be given wisely and with
due understanding of the child’s position. I mean it must be the right
instruction for the special child at that stage of its growth—not at
all what the adult thinks it ought to be taught or would like to teach
it. There can be no fixed rules as to sex teaching; no maxims laid down
that can safely be always followed.

Take, for instance, the one apparently simple matter of satisfying
the child’s certain and right curiosity at the different stages of
its growth, by telling it the facts of birth, and, as it grows older,
explaining the difficulties that most certainly will arise in the mind
of every boy and girl in regard to these questions. So far I have said
little about this matter because most people say much; holding it as
the one thing implied by sex education, whereas I regard it, as I have
tried to make plain, as a limited, though certainly important duty in
connection with that education, which should be fulfilled by parents,
and within certain limitations, by teachers in the schools.

But here, again, I am bound to utter warnings. There must be no
over-forcing of knowledge not sought for by the child, this is at
least as injurious to the emotional growth as over-forcing is to
the intellectual growth. Any one who has read Jung’s account of his
analysis of little Anna, will know what I mean. Little Anna became
troubled and nervous, worried about the birth of a little brother or
sister (I forget which). Telling her the truth did not help her, and it
took Professor Jung many months of patient work with the child to get
to the bottom of exactly what was troubling her. The most urgent rule
for the mother in this matter is this: never to arouse sexual curiosity
but to watch for its spontaneous expression and always satisfy it when
it is present. This of course is the same as saying, always tell the
child all the truth it wants to know. The difficulty here, of course,
is that so rarely is the child able to ask for the knowledge he (or
she) wants.

What above all else it is necessary is for the mother to watch for the
child’s unconscious betrayal of its own curiosity. I mean by this, that
some unconsidered remark or act is the surest hope of finding just what
part of the problem is troubling him (or her) at that time; in almost
all cases there is a personal element of jealousy, unknown to the child
or carefully hidden, which is directed against one or other parent,
usually the father, or against some brother or sister. This is why the
intellectual teaching of the facts of birth, though necessary, does not
help very much and often disastrously fails.

As I am trying all the time to force upon you, the real sex education
is an emotional education, that is why it is so difficult. I may make
this plainer by means of an illustration which I give in my book
on “Sex Education and National Health.” It was told me by a very
wise mother of her way of dealing with her son, who was, I think,
about fourteen years old. This son showed he was thinking, and was
evidently worried, about the very small families of one or at the most
two children, or the childless marriages, common among his mother’s
friends. He did not, however, speak of his trouble directly; instead
he beat round the question, somewhat in the manner of a shying horse.
After this had gone on for some time, he one day asked his mother if
her friends were more delicate (meaning, of course, more refined) than
other people. His mother was aware of what was troubling him; she
knew what he really wanted to know was whether married people lived
in celibacy when they had not children. She wisely told him the plain
facts and for him at that time curiosity was quieted.

A boy of nine had a dream which he told his parents. His mother was
in a shop, and a man on a bicycle, dressed as an officer came along
the road; he, the little boy, rushed to the bicycle, stopped it,
flung the man off, and killed him. In telling the dream the boy said,
“I prevented him getting to mother.” This dream is so clear that I
need not wait to interpret it beyond saying that the father of the
boy was an officer. It will cause no surprise to anyone, with even a
rudimentary knowledge of the emotional troubles of children, to know
that this boy developed serious nervous symptoms.

It has seemed worth while to record these two instructive little
stories, as a means of illustrating the kind of incident which
furnishes the guide with regard to the nature of the trouble to be
looked for, and shows in the first case as well the kind of help
a watchful and instructed parent can give to relieve the trouble
prevailing in the minds of the young. Dreams should always be noted,
they throw the sharpest light on the child’s emotional conflicts.
I must again urge the necessity of the parent paying the closest
attention to the child’s prattle, to watching carefully his games and
his behaviour, for in this way only can the clue be found to make it
possible to give the kind of instruction or treatment that is wanted. I
may give a few instances. Such things as the frequent childish desire
to sit up with father and mother, the calling for the mother at night
under the plea of fear are very certain signs of active jealousy.
Again the very usual unwillingness of the child to grow up arises out
of the inability to meet the necessity of separating the self from
the protective tenderness of the mother. The child is always tending
to turn back to safety, and, if this is encouraged by the mother, the
child in after life will be unable to meet the necessities of adult
action. The too fond mother perpetuates the childhood of her son or her
daughter.

What the parents can do is to watch the child, and to learn themselves,
in order to have the knowledge to clear up difficulties as these
appear, and then it may be possible to remove obstructions to growth.
Further, they can place within the child’s reach the materials—the sand
and clean messy things to play with—machines to pull to pieces, swords
to fight with, dolls to play with—every child will need different
materials, by which, to a certain extent, liberation can be found
from their primitive instincts, by giving them a free and harmless
expression. In fact the real work of the parent may be likened to that
of the stage scene-shifter and property manager.

Parental power guides the early years of the child like a higher
controlling fate. But when the boy or girl begins to grow up there
begins also the conflict between the home attachments and the need to
break away in order to free the growing soul from the spell of the
family. It is the war between the generations. The frequent and often
very deep depression of puberty arises from this struggle. And there
are the many other, and often very disturbing, symptoms, which are
rooted in the difficulty of the new adjustments. The boy or girl tries
often to separate himself (or herself) as much as possible from his
family; he (or she) may even estrange themselves from their parents
but inwardly this only binds them more firmly to the family ties.
The outward break must be regarded as a dangerous sign of the inner
conflict which the unselfish wisdom of the parents ought to be able to
aid.

I cannot follow this important matter further. But I would wish to
say that this is the time for the teacher to step forward and take up
the work begun by the parent. The parents at this period are often
hindrances to the child, they must push their children away from them
in order to help the growing souls to gain their liberation.

The uncertain and, as I fear they may seem, unsatisfactory conclusions
that must result from any honest inquiry into this difficult question
of helping the young at the start of their life’s journey, is due in
part to the fact that, even yet, and in spite of all the new knowledge
that has been gained in the last few years, we know very little about
the child’s emotional processes. Unfortunately our knowledge is not
sufficient to make it possible for any dogmatic statements to be
placed even tentatively before parents. There can be no ready-made
prescriptions, no certain cures. We do not even know where the greatest
trouble lies, whether it is in the parents and the teachers—the adults
who fail to understand the child; or in the child, who fights away from
the understanding that those who love and train him are able to offer.
We do know, however, that the difficulties on the part of the child
are very great—much greater than most of us (whether we are parents
or teachers)—satisfied in an easy grown-up optimism, have cared to
realise. In many ways we—the adults—the parents and the teachers, we
who are a generation behind the children and already have been through
the long, struggling, upward journey, by which they are now travelling,
ought to manage our love and our training for them more carefully, more
sympathetically, and more intelligently. I say intelligently, because
the sins committed in love against children are more lastingly harmful
than many of the sins committed under neglect or even under unkindness.

Thus, the final word I have to say to parents in regard to their
children is this:

_Do not love your children too possessively._

Try to understand and respect them—realise their existence as
individuals with interests and needs apart from yourself. If
necessary send them from you. Do not love your children for your own
satisfaction, but for their good, and to help them to establish, with
as little disaster as possible, their own lives.




SEX INSTRUCTION

THE AGE AT WHICH KNOWLEDGE SHOULD BE GIVEN


A story is recorded of a father and mother in ancient Greece, who,
being concerned for the welfare of their only son, went to a renowned
teacher and asked him to educate and take full charge of their child.
“How old is your son?” questioned the teacher.

“Just three!”

The sage shook his head. “I am sorry but you have come to me too late:
the boy’s character is decided already.”

I was reminded of this most instructive story as I read the account of
the evidence given by the Rev. the Hon. Ed. Lyttelton, before the Birth
Rate Commission of the National Council of Public Morals. For while I
agree wholeheartedly with the late headmaster of Eton College as to the
necessity of instructing the young in the facts of sex, I disagree,
with his view as to the method of the teaching and, even more I
disagree emphatically, as to the age at which instruction should begin.

Dr. Lyttelton holds that the first lessons should be given at the age
of nine years, when the boy ought to be taught the facts of maternity,
this knowledge to be supplemented by further teaching at the age of
twelve or thirteen explaining the even more important (for the boy)
facts of paternity.

Now it is here that I venture to disagree, and think that Dr. Lyttelton
has fallen into the very common error of underestimating the child’s
intelligence and boundless curiosity. It is in the very early nursery
days that sex education is most urgently needed. To wait until the age
of nine years has been reached is often to wait too late. In a vast
number of cases, it is locking the stable door after the horse has been
stolen.

In all children the activity of the intelligence begins to work at a
very early age, and parents, who are not willfully blind, must know
that this activity tends to manifest itself in an inquisitive desire to
know many elementary facts of life, which are dependent upon sex. The
primary and most universal of these desires is the desire to know where
“the new baby comes from.” A child of four or even younger, may begin
to ask questions on this matter quite simply and spontaneously. The
degree of curiosity, as also the frankness with which it is expressed,
will differ, of course, in different children, but I am certain this
curiosity is present and at times active in all children. If they do
not question their elders, they will certainly puzzle over the matter
themselves; often they will talk with older companions, and gain the
information they are seeking in the worst possible way.

Thus the first teacher of the child must be the mother, the one who is
most constantly with the child, tending him in washing, undressing, and
in all the daily needs of his little body. It is the mother who ought
to be the child’s supreme trainer.

Few of us understand the confusion and hurt that may be caused by a
mother’s stupid silence and even more stupid hints and evasions and
made-up fables. The false stories of babies brought by the doctor or
the stork, or a little sister or brother found under the gooseberry
bush are never believed. While the fantastic ideas of birth, that the
child makes up for himself, fix their untruth into the immature minds.
And afterwards they cannot be checked, owing to childish concealments,
which always spring up so rapidly to meet any expression of adult
reticence. These birth-fantasies, though the child seems to out-grow
them, are not really forgotten but remain active in the unconscious
mind. In this way, trouble is often started that will be determinative
of the gravest evils in the later adult life.

Parents are greatly to blame for not answering the questions of their
children, and being blind to their natural curiosity. And I would
emphasise again that this curiosity is present even when no questions
are asked. There need be no spoken words to make the child feel that
its questions are discouraged. All adults are surprisingly ignorant
of the affectability of children—their quick response to every kind of
influence.

In the case of the birth of another child—an usurper who takes the
older child’s place—this affectability is exceedingly acute on account
of the emotional disturbance, in excitement and possible jealousy.
And by means of the adult attitude, the very certain interest and
investigation of the child into what is happening may so easily become
confused and connected with what is shameful and wrong; and the trouble
is aided, and usually in the worst possible manner, by the sharpest
observations and deductions made by the child _from unconsidered
actions and overheard remarks_ of parents, and of servants and other
adults—none of whom have any idea of the child’s watchfulness or his
curiosity in this matter.

_We think little children are not interested in birth because we do not
want them to be interested._ And they, with the almost uncanny sagacity
which children show, understand this desire only too well and too
quickly.

I had a striking illustration of this curious adult blindness quite
recently. Two mothers, who were sisters, were pregnant at the same
time. Each mother told me privately that _her children_ were not
interested in the event or in any way curious, but that _her sister’s
children_ were curious and wanting to find out what was happening. It
would have been useless to tell these mothers the truth. Yet both of
them were intelligent. They believed that their own children had no
curiosity because _they wished to believe this, not because it was
true_.

Thwarted curiosity is one of the most frequent causes of emotional
disturbance in the first years of life. Do we not all know children who
as they get older exhibit an unreasoning curiosity about everything,
opening drawers, looking into the envelopes of other people’s letters,
searching excitedly for what they do not want. We want to ask the
question: Why does the child do this? What is it that urges him to act
like a “Peeping Tom?” For he is urged. You will find this habit of
needless prying almost impossible to check. It may persist into adult
life. Do not we all know grown-ups who cannot refrain from prying,
always curious, they are, on all occasions, seeking for knowledge they
do not want.

This seeking action is symbolic. It implies that the search for the
thing that is not wanted, the curiosity over something of no interest
at all, is a substitute action for something that at one time was
wanted—something about which knowledge _was desired_, and desired so
much that it _would not be denied_. It was a curiosity so real that the
thwarting of it has started emotional trouble of which these searching
acts and persisting curiosity are the symbol or sign.

This substitute formation is one of the commonest emotional processes
in children. The child pries, open drawers and letters, collects
useless objects, aimlessly searches for knowledge he does not want
_because there is some knowledge he wants tremendously badly, but
cannot speak about_. That is why he persists in his habits of peeping
and prying in spite of your scoldings and punishments. He must persist,
unless you deaden his character so terribly by your ill-judged
repression that even this substitute relief is closed. Your child
will then, probably, find some other make-believe comfort; he will
bite his nails, pick his nose, or other much worse habits may begin,
or again the emotional disturbance may be so acute that it becomes
impossible for the child to face, so that he fails in achieving any
kind of symbolic replacement. The thwarted and emotionally over-charged
curiosity is thrust back into the psyche where it remains a cause of
ill-health of body and uncleanness of mind, until that time in the
adult years, when the harvest of tares is reaped from the bad seed that
has been sown.

The parents have the greatest responsibility, as I have said already. A
child of four or even younger may begin to ask questions of its mother,
simply and spontaneously. _It is the child who must guide the parent._
But again I would give warning. The mother must not be over-eager, or
she will fall easily into the error of stimulating instead of quieting
the child’s restless inquiring mind. The child at the age when such
questions will first be asked and should be answered, will very quickly
tire of any information that may be given to it. It will break off to
run away and play and will interrupt the most beautiful and carefully
prepared lessons. And if the mother is wise she will never go beyond
the interest of the child, or the satisfying _and nothing further_,
of the special curiosity which at that special time is occupying the
child. If this course is pursued the child will probably continue
to ask for information—though there can be no certainty that this
desirable result will follow. But where such opportunities arise the
right kind of sex instruction can be attempted. For the mother will
be able to give answers in natural conversation, which will not force
information not sought for by the child. When so treated, it will be
found that children are not over-burdened by the subject, they will
interrupt and break away from the answer to the question they have
asked to speak about toy soldiers or dolls. This, to me, is the immense
value of this form of teaching: the child has the information, and yet
does not trouble about it when it is not to the point. Such a result
can never be gained by means of set talks or fixed lessons, especially
if these are mixed up with warnings, and much vague talk of things that
the child neither cares for or understands.

I should, however, be giving a wrong impression if I left the matter
here, so that this answering of children’s questions seemed to be a
simple matter. It is not simple. For each child, as for each adult the
problems of sex are personal problems. And the child whose problem
is the hardest—who most urgently needs help, will hardly ever ask
questions. Instruction in sex is not _and never can be_ like teaching
the child about other things. That is what so many of the modern
advocates of sex education so entirely forget.

In every child, as I have tried to show you there are hidden conflicts
of jealousy, of love, of hate, which determine beforehand its response
to the teaching that is given by the parents.

I cannot here treat at all adequately this difficult question; it is
one on which I have written elsewhere (_Mother and Son_, _Sex Education
and National Health_, _The Mind of the Naughty Child_) I can say
only what I have emphasised already that from the start to the end,
_sex education is an emotional education_. That, of course, is why it
is so difficult.

There is, in my opinion, too firm a belief in the efficacy of formal
instruction. The way is not so easy as this to discharge our debt to
the young. And sometimes I fear that parental talks about sex, in
particular when such talks are delayed until the boy or the girl is
reaching puberty, or until the time when the dangers of school life
have to be met, involving, as it must, a sudden breaking through of the
silence of years, may work for harm instead of for good. That this is
so in the case of some boys and girls I know to be true. You see you
cannot grow flowers in a soil choked already with weeds.




THE MYTH OF THE VIRTUOUS SEX


A day or two ago I was passing one of the great London schools at the
afternoon hour when the boys were released. I write “boys,” but among
them were many of sixteen, seventeen, or even eighteen years who looked
almost men.

On the street side, two flappers, quite young—not more, I should judge,
than fifteen, stood with their faces pressed between the iron rails and
watched the exit of the boys. Certainly they were not nice girls; they
invited with smiles, they giggled, they ogled, they gestured. There
could, I think, be no mistake as to the purpose of the girls.

I am glad to record that no single boy took the slightest notice of
them.

Now this very unpleasant incident has set me thinking. I am oppressed
with feelings of responsibility; yes—and also of shame. If I am to be
honest I must accept here, as in all relations between the two sexes,
the validity of the mans’ plea that rings—yes, and will continue to
ring—through the centuries: “The woman tempted me!”

Now, though we may accept this responsibility in theory, most often
we repudiate it in practice. From time to time—and the intervals are
not long apart—efforts are made to pass new laws which are supported
by many virtuous people—laws, whose one purpose is to increase the
punishments of men for offences against young girls.

I am in whole-hearted sympathy with any changes in our law that will
afford greater protection to young girls. I cannot, however, refuse to
see the reverse side of the question. It is proposed to raise the age
of consent for girls, while at the same time a woman is not to be held
responsible for seducing a boy who is much younger than herself. This
is unjust.

Why should we afford a period of protection longer for the girl than
for the boy?

It may, of course, be argued that the boy is better able to look after
himself. This is not true.

The girl grows up more quickly always than the boy; emotionally she
is far more developed, and, therefore, should be more, and not less,
responsible than he is. I have no doubt about this at all.

No boy knows very much about love until some girl or woman has taught
him.

Of course, the view of the evil nature of men, and of women as always
the victim, is one that can hardly fail to be pleasing to women,
depending, as it does, on their moral superiority, which stamps them
as Amazons of Purity, on the glorious mountain heights of virtue, from
where they must send down climbing ropes and ladders, in the form of
prohibitions and regulations and new laws, to pull men up out of the
deep valleys of vice.

But if we inquire more honestly into this question of men’s sins, we
shall find that it is not they who are wholly responsible. There is
little difference between men’s virtue and women’s virtue.

Almost unceasingly in our streets women are tempting men.

Always there is the invitation near: “Come and make love to me.” To
be provocative is the one simple rule of many women’s lives. Men’s
admiration is a necessity to their very existence.

True, in the after results, the woman may be, and, indeed, often is,
the victim—has to pay the heavier price; but at the start she is the
leader of the assault.

The essential fact in every relationship of the sexes is the woman’s
power over the man, and it is the misuse of this power that is the
beginning of sin.

Do not think I am unfair. Most men, I know, are not only tolerant of
women’s wiles; they like them. But most men succumb, I believe, against
their will, and often against their inclination, to the tyranny of
their own aroused passions.

Men’s chivalry, as well as their pride, has woven a cloak of silence on
this question of the temptation they are so frequently called upon to
resist and this silence has protected women—even the worst.

Let us alter our laws to help girls by all means. Yet, let us be just.
There is such a thing as too much temptation for a boy—temptation that
a woman has no right to give.




SENTIMENTAL TAMPERING WITH DIFFICULT PROBLEMS: WITH SOME REMARKS ON
SEX FAVOURITISM


It is sometimes difficult to have patience with the proposals that
are brought forward, so frequently and with such persistent zeal,
to amend our Criminal Law. One cannot doubt the sincerity of these
efforts to improve our disordered moral conditions. But something more
than good-will is required. There is such a thing as over-haste in
righteousness.

Besides, the attitude taken by these scavengers of conduct is almost
always sentimental and one-sided. It is also dishonest. I say so,
because almost without exception, they fail entirely to meet the true
facts of the evils they attempt to cure. As reformers they seem to
have but one idea; if they have more, they keep them secret, for they
agitate but for one object.

Morality is a word that has been wrested from its true meaning of the
whole duty of man in his social character and limited to the one narrow
application of sexual conduct. It is curious and significant. It is
as if we transferred to others some judgment which unconsciously was
imposed from within.

Yet obviously the strongest impediment against effective reform lies
just here—in this blindness to reality; this separation from the truth.
I need not wait to enlarge upon this further, it is impossible to
contradict. To judge blindly is to judge upon a lie.

Would you ask me to give you examples?

There is, to take one illuminative instance, the long continued and
still unsettled agitation for raising the age of consent for girls.
Those who are chiefly eager for this reform invariably evince frenzied
zeal, combined with the most curious and deplorable ignorance of the
real facts. I cannot for a moment believe that they are in the least
degree, consciously blind. But that does not alter the fact that they
are blind. Instead of facing the situation squarely with knowledge and
due consideration of all the complicated conditions, they ignore every
thing they do not want to see. They wallow in sex-righteousness.

Consider again the controversy that raged now sometime back, with
regard to the White Slave Traffic. The sudden frenzy. The unproved
stories of the trapping of girls! The clamour for legislative measures!
Every moral reformer became obsessed.

The instinctive attitude of the one-ideaed reformer had a unique
chance of displaying itself, and one marvelled at the almost
curious enthusiasm, mated to inexperience, with which the subject
was approached. While the most offensive feature of the agitation
was the sex-obsession, which gave rise to the silly notion of the
helpless perfection of women and the dangerous opposite view of the
indescribable imperfections of men. It is no exaggeration to say that
every sense of reality was lost in white clouds of virtue.

I would wish to make it plain that I am not judging these questions
either on one side or the other. What I desire to show is the danger of
a prejudiced view. And the danger is particularly active in connection
with all these attempts at changing the law, in order to give greater
protection to women and girls, while, at the same time, boys are left
unprotected.

This unpopular view of the need to protect the boy from the girl—the
man from woman—the temptress of man—is not usually brought forward.
Yet, it is a view of the situation, seen from a different side, that
cannot be neglected. The evidence is overwhelming of girls of sixteen
years and even younger tempting boys of the same age as well as those
older than themselves. If in such cases the boy is to be punished and
the girl treated as a wronged and helpless victim, not only will a
great unjustice be done, but there will be a very certain danger of
graver demoralisations.

This truth of the woman’s power, which depends upon Nature and not
upon law, the supporters of a one-sided alteration of our criminal law
too often fail to face.

I am reminded here of a little incident that happened many years ago.
I had quarrelled seriously with a man, who before I had always liked
and respected, for what I then considered was his light treatment of a
certain girl who was my friend. She had written and told me her side of
this occurrence.

Very well I recall what he said: “You don’t understand. She asked for
it.” Then, when I pressed him further, he went on. “A man always treats
a girl in the way she wants him to do.”

Now, one of the greatest troubles in connection with all
sex-legislation to-day arises from this fact that _women do not
understand_. They are inexperienced and in too great a hurry. They
think they can cure old evils with quick penny-in-the slot reforms.
There is still a chivalry that protects women and shields their
ignorance. These illusions are maintained, even by men of the world,
who are acquainted with all the complex difficulties. It is the
romantic view, a kind of male blindness that nothing seems to cure.
Women must be protected from men, who are the great offenders in all
sexual sins. Often I have marvelled at the acceptance by men of a view
of the sex-conflict so highly untrue, though flattering to women,
depending as it does on their entirely unproved moral superiority.

And here I wish to ask your attention to a consideration of the
question that is very rarely appreciated. I regard it as exceedingly
important. Those who are possessed with a frenzy for protecting girls
ought to remember that there is still greater necessity to protect
boys. It is forgotten that the young girl is not usually in constant
close relations with other men than her father and brothers. She has to
be guarded only from the _outside lover_, whom _in the first beginning
of intimacy she could, if she wished, easily repel_.

The reverse is the case with boys. In a sense, they cannot escape from
situations of danger. At school, in lodgings, even at home, in sickness
and also in health; on every occasion opportunities are provided that
make abuse exceedingly easy. The part played in the sexual initiation
of boys by servants, by lodging and boarding-house keepers, and by
other women who have to tend, and feed and mend for them is much larger
than is credited. It is folly to close our eyes to the evils that so
often arise. _Probably every man who is a seducer of women was himself
first seduced by a woman._

In spite of the emancipation upon which women pride themselves, in
spite of much theoretical knowledge, yes, in spite of social and rescue
work—where, it should be noted, they hear the woman’s story but only
in the rarest cases the man’s story—almost all women lead a shielded
life. Much that happens is outside their experience—as long as they are
virtuous. This sets definite limits to their knowledge and their power
of comprehension. And this again explains the continued belief in the
woman’s notion that, _in all cases_, the girl is the victim of the man.

It would be nearer the truth to reverse the position. Girls need to
be taught their great and unavoidable responsibility. They should be
trained to be protectors rather than to seek protection. _Men will
treat them as they want to be treated._

Let us now, for a moment, be practical and consider if there is any
reason we can discover, which will explain why we hear so much more
about the seduction of girls and the sins of men than we ever do about
the other side—the tempting by women and girls, and the seduction of
boys. The answer is simple. The boy will not talk about what happens to
him if he is led into a sexual offence at an early age. This is true
also to a large extent of the man. But the boy especially considers
he ought to have known: also he is much more self-conscious. Then he
expects to be blamed for not resisting, whatever the circumstances. He
will probably not tell anyone, unless the girl does so, until years
afterwards.

I know a schoolboy who was seduced by a woman relation years older than
himself, in a very shameful way. This boy was of high character and
very sensitive; he suffered in ways impossible to relate here, but he
never told anyone until about ten years afterwards, when he told the
woman he was to marry.

Now, if this case had been reversed and a young schoolgirl had been the
victim of a male relative, I am fairly confident the fact would not
have been concealed. Girls, even if not wholly innocent, almost always
will tell, because it has at all times been allowed to them to blame
the man. They thus can count on sympathy. This means much more than
usually is reckoned with.

Let me give a less tragic instance of a different and humourous
character. A schoolboy, about seventeen years old, was waiting for a
motor-bus in which he was going home. He was a dreamy boy and a bus
came up and, lost in his thoughts, he did not take it. He was brought
back to reality by a girl accosting him. “I waited, too,” she said.
“You, are glad arn’t you? You would like me to go in the bus with you.”

She smiled up at him: but he was not to be caught.

“I don’t care, the hell, what you do as long as you don’t expect me to
pay your fare!”

That silenced her and sent her away. But how easily, had the boy been a
less confident type, the incident might have taken a different course.
And then, if disaster had followed, the boy would be blamed, the girl
would be pitied. There is an enormous amount of sex unfairness.

I could recount many further cases in proof of how almost always it
is the girl (or the woman) who takes the first steps in forming these
friendships. Men, at least, will know that I speak the truth. And
yet this fiction of the greater virtue of the woman is persistently
maintained: while the man is condemned as being nearer the devil and
the beast.

I know that the many horrible cases of criminal assault upon children
will be quoted against me, in proof of the justice of this heavy
condemnation of men. Please do not think that I am in any way unaware
of the awfulness of these crimes. The protection of little children
is the one matter on which I feel most deeply. But there can be no
fair comparison between this class of crime and the ordinary cases of
seduction, whether we believe it is the man who seduces the woman,
or the other way round, the woman who tempts and excites the boy
or the man. In the one case an unhappy and terrible degenerate is
passion-driven into the commission of an atrocity, in the other there
is, and, indeed, must be to some extent, a mutual purpose, usually with
some calculation and a certain deliberate choice.

That is why it is so false to reality to regard the one partner as
a helpless victim. It is really a position that is impossible and
ridiculous. Are we to believe that all women are impotent and imbecile
weaklings incapable of resisting men? The truth is that in slandering
men we only slander women with the backward swing of the same blow.




THE SEDUCTION OF MEN


Quite recently an action has been brought in the High Courts by a wife
against a woman for the seduction of her husband. It is the first
time a charge of this kind has been heard in an English court of law,
though, I believe, such actions are not unknown in the newer lands of
America and Canada.

The case is one of very special interest, and opens up many questions
that go right down to the deepest problems of the relationships of men
and women.

As we should expect, the action failed. It was held that the man had
not been seduced. He was not enticed away from his wife by “the other
woman,” rather, it was the other way round. The man, not the woman,
must be held responsible; she had yielded to him only at his desire,
after persuasion and against her will.

But is this true?

As already in the two previous essays I have emphasised, perhaps
over-emphasised, the accepted, very sentimental and peculiar judgment
in all these cases. The woman the victim: the man the seducer. He the
active sinner: she the passive sufferer. All the blame to be heaped on
to him: all the pity to be given to her.

Really it is difficult, as so frequently I have stated, to have
patience at this shelving of the real facts. It seems to be forgotten
entirely how tremendous is the power of the woman in all love
relationships. Why a man under the influence of a woman he loves is as
easily led and as devoid of all will-power as a young child. Indeed,
he becomes the child of the woman, as soon as, and for as long as,
he loves her. He is her’s to make or to destroy. She strengthens him
enormously or irreparably injures and weakens his resistance. She can
hold him to the hardest duty and keep him in the fine path of right
doing. It is she leads him, not he who leads her, into the easier ways
of love.

Yes, it is women who shape the souls of men as it is women who gave
them birth.

That is why this view of the man’s responsibility in love being
greater than the woman’s is so singularly untrue. If we inquire at all
truthfully into this question of seduction, it is obvious that not the
man but the woman is the more responsible. For one thing, she knows so
much more about love, from the beginning, and _without being taught_,
than a man ever knows. Most often it is the woman who takes the first
step, breaks down the first barrier. Always there is the invitation
which unceasingly she gives, whether consciously or unconsciously
expressed—“Come and love me.”

Her dress, her movements—all invite love. To be provocative is however,
little she knows it, the one fixed simple rule of her life. In the end,
and indeed, sometimes very soon the position may be reversed, but at
the start assuredly the woman holds the cards and can make the first
move in the love-game. She is the pursuer, far more often and far more
truly, than the pursued. Too often she directs a continuous attack.

Her relation to the man is comparable to that of a magnet to a heap of
iron filings.

Love to a woman so often, when she is young, is less an affair of
passion than of excitement. It gratifies her insatiable desire for
power. The boy or the man more certainly is driven by love. This is
his principal motive. While the girl often starts on the adventure for
the sake of experiment and because she wants amusement. She pursues
love almost as a game. Passion plays a part only in the second degree.
Not infrequently, in the midst of love, the coldness of her heart is
plainly apparent.

This may seem a hard saying. I believe it is true.

Seduction as the crime of the man alone cannot, I am convinced, be
accepted, in any case without great caution. It is, as I have said
several times already, so comfortable to place the sins of sex on men.
But I doubt very much if any woman _can be seduced against her will_.

I must insist again that excitement and escape from dullness, as
also the joy in receiving presents and having “a good time,” are the
principal motives that first lead girls into illegal relations.

Sometimes it is worse than this.

Many women, seducers of men—women who draw men from their wives and
their homes, and their duty, are nothing but cold experimentors. They
are speculators in love. They do this for delight of power, in the same
way as men are speculators in business.

Perhaps the position is unavoidable.

The subjection of man is a necessity to some women’s existence. Love
is to them a similar feeling to love of the chase. They cannot keep
from pursuing men. It is, as I have said, an expression of the ever
increasing demand for excitement. Conquest in love gives to women the
opportunities for the fulfilment of themselves, which men gain in many
different departments of life.

But no man, I think, could satisfy completely the craving for
dominion, which the delusive humility of his desire awakens in this
type of woman. Then when she commits the error, from a womanly point
of view, of hunting down her man; leading him on by helping him too
much—seducing him, instead of waiting for him and drawing him slowly
and unconsciously by her love, she awakens the same instinct for
dominion and thirst for excitement in the man. It is then that the man
becomes a seducer of other women. It is the lust to devour, to crush,
quickened into being by suggestion. It explains, I believe, the cruelty
of all wild love.




PLAYING WITH LOVE


Many girls to-day try deliberately to keep love light. Shrewd enough
to understand the heavy claims of serious love affairs that lead to
marriage, they prefer flirtations of weeks only—episodes that are a
secret and, as it were, detachable part of their lives.

It is a dangerous state.

Emotional power and the enjoyment of the simple pleasures of life are
dried up by such constant stimulation. A new diet of excitement must
always be provided. The object of life is to cheat time and to crowd
out boredom. Whatever is going on they must be in it from a jazz dance
or river picnic to a church bazaar.

In the old days it used to be only duties for girls—now it is rights
and pleasure with the demand to be left to make their own lives. There
is a turning away from duty; a hatred of anything dull.

Girls as I have just shown you want love as an experience and to
provide the always desired excitement. They do not want to marry and to
settle down.

Thus while condescending to fascinate men, while deliberately seeking
attention these young women still hold themselves in hand. Intending to
exploit life to the uttermost they find love amusing, but they fight
always against its being a vocation.

There is calculation and dangerous hardiness in their attitude to their
lovers.

Their transitory love affairs are, indeed, regarded in very much the
same way as formerly they were regarded by the average young men—as
enjoyable and thrilling incidents of which they are ashamed only when
they are talked about and blamed.

With no sex conscience, these wantons of excitement have no
consciousness of womanly responsibility. Each new affair affords an
eagerly snatched tribute to a colossal and restless vanity.

This is one type of woman who to-day plays with love.

There are as well other girls of a different character, less concerned
with pleasure, less consciously vain, more emotional, and to men more
interesting. They are incessantly thinking of their own personalities;
and, for this reason, they are equally, even if not more, harmfully
destructive in the utter misery they often create.

These are the girls who are always emotion hunting.

Impossible to tell what are their pseudo-feelings. A sort of sterile
passion, which expends itself in their failure to know, and find, what
they want.

They do not wish consciously to escape the responsibilities of
marriage; indeed they seek unceasingly the perfect man to whom they may
surrender their freedom. But they suffer from a formless discontent
that rots into every love and prevents them finding satisfaction.

Consumed with haggard restlessness, such girls pass their days in a
dangerous state of expectancy and nervous tiredness. Eternally they are
unsatisfied without knowing why.

Born spiritual adventurers, these worshippers of emotionalism,
attitudinising and thinking perpetually of themselves, desire at all
cost a position in the limelight. They love romantically, but rarely
are they strong enough to obey their inclinations. Such girls are out
on an eternal quest; and, every now and again, they believe they have
found the ideal man they are seeking. Then they discover they have
not found him, so their search is taken up anew. While often their
insistent egoism, which causes them to ignore the rights of others and
all social obligations, drives them into dangerous corners; does not
give them a chance; turns them to use mean weapons of deceit; forces
them into false situations that too often close around them like a trap.

Many other nobler types, besides these two, have been playing with love.

Girls of profound and steadfast emotional nature are rare. The great
majority of girls certainly are not entirely light-minded, but they
are less serious, more noisily determined to do what they want, to
get what they can both out of men and out of life. They are very like
children, playing at desperate rebels, who take up weapons to use far
more deadly than they know.

All this playing with love is detestable—all of it. It bears witness to
a poverty of emotion and a shameful shirking of responsibility.

Women are the custodians of manners in love. The future rests
with them. And this responsibility cannot safely be set aside,
dependent as it is on forces active long before human relations were
established—forces which press on women back and back through the ages.

Yes, woman has laid upon her the sacred necessity of seriousness in all
that is connected with Love. It is a duty imposed upon her by Nature,
and one that she cannot escape. That is why there is so much danger
in these restless neurotic years, when girls are too excited to be
serious.




SECTION III

MARRIAGE AND OTHER RELATIONSHIPS




IS PASSIONATE LOVE THE SUREST FOUNDATION FOR MARRIAGE?


“There is no subject,” says Bernard Shaw in the preface to _Getting
Married_, “on which more dangerous nonsense is talked and thought than
marriage.” And though I disagree rather violently with Mr. Shaw’s
views about marriage, he is right here. We do talk dangerous nonsense,
which need not matter very much, if we did not think absurdly, and so
inevitably have to pay the fruit in wrong action. This explains, I
think, our curious levity, our unhappiness, and fierce refusal to face
facts.

We have infested our ideals with the poison of pleasure and turned away
from essential things. Marriage is not a religion to us—it is a sport.

I say this quite deliberately. I am sure we know better how to engage
a servant, how to buy a house, how to set up in business—how, indeed,
to do every unimportant thing in life, than we know how to choose
a partner in marriage. We require a character with our cook or our
butler, we engage an expert to test the drains of our house, we study
and work to prepare ourselves for business, but in marriage we take no
such sensible precautions; we even pride ourselves that we do not take
them. We speak of _falling in love_, and we _do fall_.

The conventions of to-day are false; they are bound up with
concealments or with an equally untruthful openness. It does not,
however, follow from this that mere destruction will be enough, that
everyone’s unguided ignorance will lead to success and freedom. The
_laisser faire_ system is as false in the realm of marriage as it
is in industry and economics. While equally false, though this is
rarely recognised, is the modern spiritual view of marriage that love
can be found only in perfect harmony of character between the wife
and the husband, _and is independent of duty_. It is true that love
differs from lust in its deeper insight into the personality, deeper
interest in character, as opposed to the inexpressive smooth outline
and “untrained” physical beauty of the body. But the character and
intellect may be studied and loved as self-centeredly, as much with a
view to the enjoyment of mental excitement, as the body itself.

Of all of which what is the moral? This:

In marriage, as in other things, we fasten our chains about our own
necks. We do not find what we desire because we do not know what we
want.

The very word love is used in so general and indiscriminate a way to
denote sometimes the most transitory impulse and sometimes the most
intense feeling, that a mass of misunderstanding arises. The emotion
which most often passes under the name of love is a maudlin, sickly
sentiment or passion founded on hypocrisy, which means nothing at
bottom but the desired enjoyment of a passion which is felt but not
understood, and which professes to be everything but that which it is
in reality.

With more courage to face truth, we should have a surer ideal; there
would be much less sentimentality, but much deeper feeling about
marriage. Our romance is slightly vulgar. Vulgarity is a sign of
weakness of spirit, that spirit which is “the life that carves out
life” as Nietzsche says.

We associate romance with courtship and not with marriage. “Thank God
our love-time is ended!” cried a north country bride on the day that
marriage ended her long engagement.

Now, I do not know whether this delightful story is true, but it does
illustrate the attitude of many ordinary couples, whose love adventure
ends at the very hour it should begin.

Every marriage ought to be a succession of courtships.

A very slight knowledge of existing marriages is sufficient to convince
even the most optimistic believer that true mating is hard. I do not
believe that most marriages are unhappy, but I do know that only the
very few are happy. With many perhaps, and even with those who are
passionate lovers, the attraction of sex always seems to fall short of
its end; it draws the two together in a momentary self-forgetfulness,
but for the rest it seems rather to widen their separateness. They are
secret to one another in everything; united only in the sexual embrace.

Can we, then, ever find perfect love? Is it not like exercise of the
body? You can develop it to a certain point, but not beyond, without
danger; and very slowly, with continued patient effort. Do we not need
exercise of the soul? I do not know. Often I feel I know nothing. To
some men and women it is all simple enough, a woman is just a woman
and a man is a man. The trouble begins when any woman becomes the one
desired woman and any man the one desired man.

There is gain and development in this selective tendency of Love—and
yet, if I am right, there is terrible danger lurking in the application
of this egoistic spiritual view.

We may not safely ask too much or too little from marriage or take too
high or too low a view of it.

I am not very hopeful of improvement. At least, not for a long time,
and never unless we learn to be more honest about ourselves and about
love.

In fear, we have tried to keep the blinds down so that love may be
decently obscured. Yet how can we ever begin to understand and deal
with these problems of sex unless we will admit all the instincts and
tendencies which ever lead us backwards to the more elemental phases of
life? The deepest of the emotions is sex, and its actions, like all the
emotions that are fundamental, may be traced into a thousand bye-paths
of the ordinary experience of each one of us; it exercises its
influence on every period of our development, and works subconsciously
to control our actions in endless ways that we refuse to acknowledge.

Hence the conflicts which manifest themselves so strangely and so
fiercely in our lives. The emotional-self refuses, at times, to be
controlled by the reason-self. Restraint cannot do much, and indeed,
often brings deeper evils. For our unconscious selves are stronger than
all the pretenses and guards we have set up by our conscious wills,
either as individuals to encourage our own conceit and egoism, or
collectively as a so-called civilized people in the hope of controlling
conduct.

That is why so much that is said to-day about sexual conduct is so
foolish. The real question is not what _people ought to do_, but what
they _actually do_ and _want to do_, and, therefore, are likely _to
go on doing_. It is these facts that the reformers of marriage almost
always fail to face.

To me, one thing, at least, is certain, the romantic view of marriage
has failed us.

But we cannot change the ideal of to-day unless we have ready a new
ideal to inspire our conduct. We cannot destroy a sanctuary unless we
first build a sanctuary.

There is a strange idea among some young people to-day that sexual
happiness can be gained by breaking away from all the traditional
bonds, it is the visible sign of our confusion as a people, and the
want of happiness in our lives. The new generation should not set at
naught the experience of the ages.

The individual household where both parents share in the common
interest of bringing up the children, is the foundation on which
marriage has been built up, and on which it must stand. If the
conditions of the home are seriously changed, and the bearing and
caring for children is no longer considered an essential part of
marriage, a change in marriage itself will follow. I do not think you
can hold the one if you let the other go. For Westermark is right, and
children should not be regarded as the result of marriage, but marriage
as the result of children. And love between men and women implies
duties and responsibilities that go out beyond themselves; without
this, even love of the most passionate kind, loses its quality and
tends to become an ephemeral or even a corrupt thing.

There is much stupidity in the view of many reformers of marriage
who fail to see that, however hard it is to live faithfully to the
obligation, and unchecked responsibilities of love, the old ideal of
marriage does so appeal to our emotional nature, that men and women are
seriously unhappy in trying to destroy it.

Not all who cry “It is useless,” can do without the limiting safeguards
of children and of legal marriage. We still feel the serpent’s sting of
jealousy and the old questions, “Where do you come from?” “What have
you been doing to-night?” “Who handled your body till daytime, while I
watched and wept?” “In what bed did you lie and whom did you gladden
with your smile?” are still felt, even if not uttered by the lips, of
the most emancipated husbands and wives. For our sex-judgments are not
intellectual, nor are they merely moral; they are not just questions of
understanding and forgiving, but they are also physical, of the nerves,
of the blood, of the fiercest instinct.

Fortunately it is easier to talk of love’s freedom, than it is to act
as if it ever could be free. And in spite of what advanced people say,
some feeling of duty in sex will always exist as long as it hurts us
at all to hurt others. The immorality that says, “Do what you desire
irrespective of others,” is as yet beyond most of us.

Attempts to solve these problems quickly are bound to fail.
Intellectual revolutionists are, I think too hopeful with regard to
what may be done to produce a harmony of sexual needs. The optimism
that once prevailed in regard to economics is being transformed to
sexual matters. Once people supposed that if every one followed his own
interests a harmony would automatically establish itself in the economy
of society. Now they tend to say the same about sex.

Intellectual views of life and what is right and wrong always act
to break people into groups, each struggling to explain everything
according to one theory, built on a single principle. And as the result
of caring so much for one thing, people seem quite unable to grasp
any facts that do not refer to their own particular reform; they are
not able even to consider it as part of a world in which there is
anything else. All the evil in marriage? is due to too large families
and populations pressing upon the food supply, we are told by one
class of enthusiasts, while others point to men’s tyranny over women.
Emancipation for women, with an equal moral standard, would have a
magical effect: men are all bad say some. The father is a parasite,
unnecessary except for his share in begetting the child; the mother is
the one parent. All would be well if legal marriage were abolished and
motherhood made free, is the view common among one class of reformers.
Eugenical breeding and sterilisation of the unfit is the remedy brought
forward by others. Many suggest economic changes and the endowment of
motherhood.

But the matter is not so simple as these reformers seem to believe.
And I doubt if any outward change is really capable of producing the
prompt kind of penny-in-the-slot results that its supporters claim that
it can. The complexity of marriage (in particular, the occurrence of
sexual disharmonies so present and active for misery to-day) is ignored
by all intellectual reformers. It is because they have no emotional
hold on life as a whole that they find it easy to squeeze all life into
their magic theories. For myself I can see no sure remedy—though in a
later essay I shall try to suggest a palliative: but were I asked to
state my deepest belief, I could say only “A few thousand years more of
development, a growth towards consciousness and a fuller understanding
of the meaning of life.”




MARRIAGE REFORM


Many people seem to be in fear that any change in the marriage laws
will destroy marriage. “Hands off! No tinkering with marriage!” they
cry in a panic of timidity and moral anger.

I marvel at this want of faith. Do they, indeed, believe that the
institution of marriage rests on a trembling quicksand, so that its
supporters are compelled to build a scaffolding of lies to sustain its
foundations?

The laws of marriage are only the register of what marriage is: they
do not control marriage. There are no laws, for instance, to regulate
the perfect love-unions of birds, whose faithfulness and family life
present a beautiful and high standard of conduct.

Let there be no mistake here. I have been told that I wish to destroy
permanent marriage, that I do not consider the welfare of children and
the best interests of the race. I deny these charges; they are untrue.

My ideal of marriage is one that many will call old-fashioned. It
demands the consecration of the mother in service to her husband, to
their children, and the home. That is why I advocate the recognition
and regulation of other forms of union, not because I have a low ideal,
but to prevent the degradation of marriage by forcing into it those who
do not desire, and, therefore, are unsuited for, its binding duties.

The immense failure of marriage to-day arises from the confusion of
our desires and our ceaseless search for individual happiness. We
have no firm ideal, no fixed standard of conduct either for women
or for men. And the existence of many standards of what ought to be
done; the liberty permitted to the man, the liberty permitted to the
woman; if the wife shall continue her work or profession or remain
at home dependent on the husband’s earnings; whether the marriage
shall be fruitful or sterile—these are but a few of the questions
left undecided. And thus to leave men and women unguided, with their
own ideas of what is good to do and what is evil, is the dry-rot very
surely destroying the ideal of marriage.

Every couple starts anew and alone, and the way is too difficult for
solitary experiments.

This modern delusion of looking at marriage as an individual affair is
of course, the essence of the selfish, egocentric habit of life—it
focuses desire on personal adventure and personal needs. With more
courage to face the realities of love we should have a surer ideal.
There would be less sentimentality, but much deeper feeling about
marriage.

This, then, is what I would teach: No longer must marriage be regarded
solely as a personal relationship. Marriage is a religious duty.

“To be mothers were women created, and to be fathers, men.”

This was the ideal which gave the breath of life to marriage among the
men and women in our earlier England, who were more fixed in character
and less selfish than we are to-day.

It is this ideal we have lost.




TO-DAY’S IDEAS ON MARRIAGE

ARE WE SEEKING VAINLY AFTER HAPPINESS?


The love-story of to-day differs in one essential way from the
love-story of yesterday. Yesterday’s love-story always had a youthful
hero and heroine, and ended with the marriage bells. To-day’s, which
is a far harder love-story to write, begins with marriage. Moreover,
the bride and bridegroom are rarely young, nor are they ravishingly
beautiful.

Earlier authors in short, shirked the real problem of marriage. They
ended where they should have begun. For the main difficulties, in that
always difficult adventure of the two learning to live as one, do
not lie in youth, the period of quick adaptation, of easy falling in
love. The trouble does not often begin in the courtship or honeymoon
days; but it comes later in the struggle to harmonise and bend the
character to the demands and lessons of marriage, and in the continued
effort of maintaining love _after knowledge of love has come_. There
is the difficulty. The preservation of love when all the passionate
preliminaries are over.

Love is not walking round a rose garden in the sunshine; it is living
together, working together. And the honeymoon is as trifling as the
hors d’oeuvre in comparison with wedded life, and as unable to satisfy
the deep needs of women and men. And the greatest difficulty rests in
the fact that very few of us understand what our deeper needs are.
Even to ourselves we are strangers. That is one reason why marriage is
always difficult.

You see so often the partner one falls in love with does not make a
good life companion. It’s all very well to moralise, but you can hardly
ever be certain beforehand how these relations will turn out. There is
physical attraction and passion, and there is affection—just being pals
with each other. Who is to know which is the more necessary—the better
for happiness of these two? You ought to have both, but few couples are
so fortunate as that. We are almost all of us divided in our desires
and our wills as also in our love.

The boys or girls to-day are, I think, more natural. There is much
greater openness and less pretence. Even our novelists frankly say that
every woman looks with special interest on a well formed man. There
is no convention marking this as improper, “the baser side of love.”
We Victorians were everlasting children in an everlasting nursery; we
did not play with love, but we fiercely refused seriousness towards
the fundamental emotions. Perhaps that is why we lost the old firm
tradition of marriage and its duties, and why we have succeeded in
putting nothing in its place.

The disease of our wills and the sickness of our souls has rust-eaten
into marriage. We are doing nothing because we are too frightened to be
serious. We have sought to drown our unhappiness and the exhaustion of
our souls, to fill emptiness with pleasure; to place the personal good
in marriage above the racial duty; to forget responsibility, and, in so
doing, inevitably we have turned aside from essential things.

We have missed happiness in trying to grab at it.

Cannot you see what is wrong? We are so terribly tired of this search
for something that we never find. We are like little lost children, we
run, this way and that, we cry and make much noise, in fear, seeking
for our mothers. Yes, our adventures are the tricks of the child who
fantasies so as to pretend that everything is right when in reality
everything is wrong.

Love is a dream to those who think but a terrible reality to those who
feel.

The frequent and tragic failure of so many marriages arises from a
confusion of our values and our undisciplined wills. In one way we
expect too much from love, while in another we expect too little. What
we have lost is any fixed standard of duty. I have said this before: I
must say it again.

Marriage has ceased to be a discipline, it has become an adventure.

It is, little as we may believe it, the search for deeper and more
perfect love that so often endangers love. Seeking, always for the one
satisfying mate, we must find a partner corresponding in every respect
to our ideal. The man in Mr. Hardy’s novel, “The Well-Beloved,” spent
forty years in trying to do this, and his ultimate failure is typical
of the experience of most of us.

Fools and blind, we neither understand nor seek the cause of our
failure.

We need a new consciousness of our social spirit and racial
responsibilities in marriage: the idea of handing down, at least as
much as we have received. We are the guardians of the Life Force. Let
us honour ideals of self-dedication; of fixed obligations of the one
sex to the other, of duties to our children long before they are born,
and let us spread the New Romance of Love’s Responsibility to Life;
then there will be in society in general and not in a mere fraction of
it, happiness in marriage and passionate parenthood.




WHY MEN ARE UNFAITHFUL


There is a question I would ask all wives, whose husbands having left
them, are to-day seeking relief in the divorce courts. What was it that
first sent your man away from you? What was it that first turned him
from the safe happiness of marriage to seek the restless unhappiness of
unregulated love?

It will not do to dismiss this question with the old unreasoning
condemnation of men; nor will it serve to talk of their polygamous
nature and uncontrolled passions. Let us look at the matter a little
more closely, and with greater regard to truth.

In marriage the woman dominates more often than usually is known. For
one thing she has the children on her side. I think marriage is more of
a duel than usually is acknowledged. One partner wins, kills the other,
kills all that makes joy and life—makes the one who conquers a captain;
the other—the conquered one, a servant, slave—what you will. It is so
always, more or less. And in this marital duel there is no quarter;
and, nine times out of every ten, it is the woman who holds the cards;
she who wins. If she is clever, she knows this—knows the game is in her
hands. But the dice she has to throw is her sex, and she has only been
allowed one throw! And when she has thrown wastefully—Yes, it is here
that disaster enters into marriage and makes tragedy of the game of
life.

But there is another side—and a side that is of immense importance to
women.

Undeniably the greatest function of any man in the life of the average
woman is to be the father of her child. All other things he means to
her are secondary to this. For this reason, after the birth of her
first child, she frequently ceases, though she does not know it, to
love her husband as a man, and for himself.

The feeling of a child against a woman’s bosom is more to her than
the kiss of a lover or the devotion of a husband. What is it that she
feels? It is a liberating power; a sensation of unaccustomed unity—like
a strong tide that carries her over everything, makes her unconscious
of the worry of the days. It is life itself. It irradiates all the
world about her, all that belongs to her—her very soul. She has become
one with life—a creator, as a god.

That is why so often the man—the husband and the father, finds himself
left outside this charmed circle of life.

And even when the marriage is childless (as happens most frequently in
the marriages that come to the divorce courts), this same passionate,
grasping maternity acts—indeed, acts sometimes with added fierceness
and even more disastrously. She mothers her man, but she does not love
him. She gives him the protection that she should have given to her
children but she holds back the inspiration and the spur that he most
needs from her.

The woman’s life so often is filled with attending her children or her
husband, whom she loves (I must press this home again), where she has
no children, not as a mate, but as a child. She ceases to consider him
as a man—to belong to him as completely as he belongs to her.

She holds back more and more of herself—the vital part that he wants,
while, at the same time, she demands more and more from him. The man
feels that he is losing, giving up his individuality with all that he
cares for most, and, after a period of loneliness and unhappiness,
broken, probably, with some bluster and conflict, he gives in and
begins not to care.

The result in the end is almost certain. The lower types of husband
from time to time, will break away and find compensation in wild
love. Some will seek distraction in work, or will develop a temper
and nerves. Other men of more refinement will suffer much more, till
they too break away at last; they will turn from the reality of life
to dreams, unless they too seek and find love and sympathy with some
woman, who, without the binding security of marriage, is more careful
to understand them and to love them for themselves.

Most wives have yet to learn the deeper responsibilities of love; and
this not at all in regard to their duties to their husbands, which most
often are too perfectly fulfilled, but in the more intimate and far
more exacting task of giving them spiritual freedom as well as sympathy
and understanding.

I believe that this failure on the part of so many wives, in holding
back just what the man most craves and seeks for, is the real cause,
to which all other causes are subsidiary, of that failure in the
continuance of the husband’s love, which brings so many marriages,
which started in happiness, to the disaster of the divorce courts.

In my opinion, the greatest cause of error is in women’s limited
experience which makes their judgments hard. While another cause arises
from the tendency, and already I have emphasised more than once (a
tendency due to a deep inner cause of sex difference) to throw the
whole blame for sexual sins upon men. Some women carry sex antagonism
like a flag, which they flourish in every wind. These are, of course,
a small minority, but the majority of women fail to take a wide, sane
view both on this question of the unfaithfulness of husbands and that
of the whole physical relationship of marriage.

And the remedy? Yes, that is the difficult matter. We cannot alter
these inharmonies of love by any cut-and-dried reforms. The expression
of sex is a question largely of understanding. Its regeneration must
begin with a movement, in particular, on the part of women, towards a
truer acknowledgment of their own natures and an acceptance of men’s
needs.

I dare to think of such a regeneration of Love, but it must come
through education in consciousness and a fuller understanding of life.
And by education must be understood all that influences the unconscious
as well as the conscious self, so that our full life may be lived in
harmony, and not with one half of ourself in enmity with the other
half.




WHY WIVES ARE UNFAITHFUL


It may, and I expect will, be said that I am looking at this question
of faithfulness in marriage from the man’s side only. This is not
because I do not see and sympathise with the woman’s position. I am
thinking really just as much of one partner as of the other. What I
wish to do is to focus attention. For this reason, I am insisting upon
the fact, of the wife’s coldness as being most often the first cause
which drives the husband from his affection and his duty. I do this
because it is just the real cause that is almost always neglected,
unrealised, in particular, by women themselves.

Women have been taught to believe, and do really feel, that by sexual
unfaithfulness a husband does them the cruellest possible wrong that a
man can do to a woman.

It is rare to find a woman who is not sexually jealous. To possess
and to hold, even when she has ceased to desire the possession, is a
quality that is exceedingly common in wives. And our iniquitous divorce
laws, with their obsession with sexual offences, help to maintain this
view of marriage.

But is the man ever wholly to blame? It is so easy to talk
self-righteously of the unfaithfulness of men—of their polygamous
nature and their attraction to wild love.

I never heard such nonsense. Men are the most faithful creatures alive.
After all, almost in every case, the man has given away only what
his wife has shown him she does not want for herself. As long as she
desires him, indeed, often, _as long as she will put up with him_, her
man will stick to her—yes, _stick with the closeness of the proverbial
burr_.

Most English wives always are acquiescent, rather than passionate
in the sexual embrace. Even when in love, they are shy and often
unresponsive. Hiding what they feel, rarely showing their husbands
that they want them with any real desire. Then, after a few years of
marriage, his embraces are either evaded or repulsed, if not, they are
_suffered as a duty_.

Everyone who does not blink facts, knows that the vast majority of
marriages are unhappy owing to the coldness of the wife. Very often
this starts from the beginning of marriage. The wife is disappointed:
she finds the husband different from the lover of her dreams.

In the story of _Beauty and the Beast_ we have material out of which
part of the great sex difficulty can be explained. In the fairy story,
the husband, who before marriage looks like a beast, after marriage,
becomes a prince. In real life the story is inverted. There is a
deluding force in the mere skin and limbs of those of the opposite sex
at the time when maturity is reached which may give princely attributes
to those who would be seen as beasts at other times. The prince seen as
a beast after marriage is a tragedy into which the romantic, ignorant
girl must beware of drifting. The man who most boldly plays up to the
romantic part expected of him, reciprocating to the perhaps unconscious
encouragement of the girl—is not the man who will be most agreeable
to live with. I believe there is real danger in the sentimental view
of love that is common to most girls. They do not know the poverty of
feeling that loudly expressed sentiment may hide. The defect of many
unfaithful lovers is not sensuality, but sentimentality. The lower
types of lovers are strangely, almost incredibly sentimental.

It cannot, I think, be denied that sexual anaesthesia is present in
many women and there would seem to be evidence that even where it is
not present before experience of love, it arises _after marriage_. Any
number of wives are unable to give themselves up to the sexual act in
such a way as to derive from it real satisfaction and the gladness
and health that it should give. This is a very grave matter. The evil
would be less if these frigid women did not marry, but as a rule they
do marry. It is a curious fact that women who sexually are cold, are
sought as wives with greater frequency than are more passionate women,
probably because their easily maintained reserve acts as a stimulus to
the man’s desire. Men are persistently blind in these matters. They
want response to their own love in their wives, but most of them are
very much afraid of any woman who possesses the strong passion to
enable her to give such response.

In short, as we found in the previous essay on unfaithful husbands,
woman gains her fulfilment from the man when he gives her his child.
But when she turns from him, she leaves him unsatisfied. The drama
and the novel are burdened with this problem, which, indeed, intrudes
itself on every hand.

We have, by our wrong ideals, for long been inducing an entirely
perverted view, which regards physical desire as something of which
women should be ashamed, and the sex act as a thing in itself degrading
and even disgusting—the nasty side of love and of marriage, something
to be submitted to, indeed, in order to bear children or for the sake
of the loved man whose passions must be allowed, but not a thing for
health and desire—for the delight and perfection of the woman herself.

This false view, I affirm again, is the blight that has been, and still
is, the destroyer of sexual happiness and health. And this fear and
denial of love; this separation between the passion allowed to the man
and not allowed to the woman, is the serious side of this problem of
marriage. For the hideous disguises and constant lying, too often made
necessary to both the partners, owing to the wife’s entire failure
to realise the physical necessities of love, makes domestic life an
organised hypocrisy.

We fight and fight to be free. Yet ever the concealed antagonism lays
fresh hold, upon both the husband and the wife. It crops up in many
and curious ways, imposing its poison and destroying life—the deep,
deep-hidden rage of unsatisfied love.

The need for love will not often allow itself to be inhibited without
claiming payment. And if desire so frequently manifests itself in
abnormal forms of the coarsest and commonest dissipation, this is
almost always to be explained by some hindrance opposed to its normal
expression. When women face facts and realise this truth, many things
in the conduct of husbands will be clear that hitherto have been hidden
from them.

There is, however, another aspect of this question which now must
be considered. For to leave the matter here would be the greatest
injustice. A further question must first be asked. Why is this coldness
in women so prevalent? Why does the desire of even the loving wife so
often cease towards her husband? It is a difficult question to answer.
One reason has been given already. We have noted women’s false attitude
to love; an attitude which, in so many cases, makes her ashamed of
expressing openly the passions she feels. Yet there is, I think another
and much deeper part of the truth that is fairly clear. Love is a more
difficult thing for women than it is for men. Each man is able to
enforce his sexual desire upon his wife _at a time when she feels no
desire, whereas she cannot gain her desire unless he gain his_. We may,
perhaps, trace back to this cause, many of the feelings of disharmony
and waning of desire which injures the woman’s power to love.

I must follow this a little further. In marriage the husband, usually
exercises his marital privileges _when he wishes_. He does not think
sufficiently of, or understand sufficiently as he should, the wishes of
his wife. For what _she says_ must never be accepted as representing
really what she wishes. It is very hard for any man to understand how
almost impossible it is for a woman, if she is good, to be frank about
sexual desire. Both our laws, and opinion and custom have strengthened
the view—not usually openly acknowledged but usually felt—that the
husband has the right to approach his wife when he desires. Her right
is not equally considered, too often it is taken for granted that
she has no desires or real sex-needs to be considered. The result
is inescapable. The man’s passion finds relief while she remains
unsatisfied. She is in just the same position as someone who is forced
to eat a meal without appetite.

And inevitably this leaves her unresponsive, makes her irritable,
capricious, and quite incomprehensible to her husband.

Of course, this disharmony, is not always conscious even to the woman
herself, who usually fails quite to understand what is the matter or to
connect her restless unhappiness with the stirrings of her unsatisfied
love. The dyspeptic does not know that he wants food: he turns away
from it. In the same way the woman turns away from love. She gives in
to the inhibiting influences and accepts the abysmal misconception into
which one sex has fallen in regard to the other.

This difference in the power for sexual sacrifice between the two sexes
is, I have frequently thought, one of the gravest causes of misery in
marriage. It will take very long to over come it. Only as we advance
in refinement and knowledge of love can this antagonism in the sex act
lessen, as the woman gains in frankness and the man comes to know how
to arouse and keep aflame her desire.

For woman is passionate. There is no greater lie than the so often
reiterated assumption that she “_is naturally and organically
frigid._”[4] We must remember that this view of woman’s coldness in
love is of comparatively modern growth. Yet it is a lie that will
take a real revolution in our moral ideas to uproot. It is, in large
measure, at least, the result of our pretences—the horrible, grasping,
destroying, back-wash of shams. It is the result of the way in which
women have lived, with blinds drawn down on most of the unruly
disturbance and elemental forces in love.

The wife whose love is turned away from her husband finds substitute
satisfaction in her home and her children, if she has them, or, failing
these, in dress and amusement and other outside interests; or in a
lover, who gives her new hope of finding satisfaction in love. And the
poor bewildered husband is quite unaware of the cause of this coldness.
He cannot understand his wife’s unfaithfulness. He does not know that
his unthinking acceptance of her subordination to his desire, however
gladly given, is what has, and indeed must, exhaust the passion in her.

For I do not deny, as already I have stated, that sexual coldness is
exceedingly common on the part of the wife to-day. What I do deny
is that this is a natural condition; rather is it a symptom of the
mistakes of our civilisation that have cheated women and men alike of
health and happiness in love.

I affirm again, that this idea of coldness in love being natural
to women is entirely false. Complete absence of satisfaction in
love cannot be borne, especially when living in the close intimacy
of married life, by any woman, through a period of years, without
producing serious results on the body and the mind. It is in the
blighting effects of this pseudo-celibacy that we must seek the cause
of the sterility of so many married women’s lives.

Do I put this other side of the problem of marital-celibacy—the woman’s
side—in a strong light. Yes I do, but I put it faithfully as I have
come to know it from the facts I see daily around me.

It is hard to say how often, and how many wives have put from them
the temptation to seek happiness in love _at any price_; no less hard
is it to compute to what extent the transformation of this suppressed
sexual passion is expended in passion in other channels. We see it in
a hundred cases to-day. In every instance where passion is called for
woman tends by her nature to be carried further than man.

There is, of course, no exact measuring in these matters, but who among
us can dare to say that the harm done by the deprivation of love is
greater in the lives of men than of women? I doubt not it is the other
way. We hear so much of the sex-needs of husbands that we have become a
little wearied. We accept so much for them as being right and natural,
but who shall calculate the number of equally right and natural
impulses that women have resisted?—resisted until the very instinct to
love tends in time to become dulled and blighted.

I am willing to grant, indeed, that few women experience that obsessing
longing of the man to grasp the woman of his desire, nor do they, as a
rule, I think suffer the same terrible physical depression that causes
incapacity for control. I am not certain here: women are less open
about these matters than men are, and one hesitates to judge other
women by oneself. We are dealing with a question very difficult to
solve. We may find some explanation in the fact that many passionate
women have had to learn how the energy of the sexual impulse may be
diverted into other activities. It is a lesson that possibly men will
have to learn. Yet I do not know, the price women have had to pay has
been heavy and the results gained very poor. And does not this denial
of love entail a waste of life?—that is what really matters. It is very
hard to know the truth.

Here, then, is the question I would put to men who are suffering to-day
from the unfaithfulness of women. I would ask them. Have they taken
sufficient trouble to understand, both on the physical and psychical
side, the sexual nature of woman, which is much more complex than
their own? The art of love is not understood by men. If they paid more
attention to this subject marriage would be freed from the strongest
and most frequently operating cause that brings it to disaster.
But this will never be done until we have ruled out from our moral
conscience the idea of “the body as the prison of the soul.”

I have often asked myself if this misconception is not the real cause
of all sex trouble?




SHOULD DOCTORS TELL?


Of the many differing opinions concerning the question whether doctors
should reveal medical secrets, none that I know have been more
interesting, in particular to women, than that of a local practitioner
(whose name I have forgotten) who spoke at a Conference of doctors
met to consider this question. In opposing with admirable frankness a
resolution for the continuance of the practice of professional secrecy,
he asked the straight question, whether “a bounder” should be allowed
to live and his wife and child to die?

For here we touch at once the grave difficulty of the position. The
discussion, as is evident, was concerned more particularly with the
position in regard to venereal diseases.

The whole question has, indeed, been brought before public attention
in connection with the recommendation of the Royal Commission on
Venereal Diseases that a communication made by a medical practitioner
with regard to these diseases and to guard the innocent from infection
should be regarded as a privileged communication, and the law of libel
be so modified as to give this safeguard.

Now, on the face of it, this would seem a simple matter. And the
question I want to ask is, why the professional medical voice of this
country has pronounced so emphatically against it? I know, of course,
the reason that is given, that the divulging of a patient’s secret,
without his or her consent, and even if for a good reason, must weaken
confidence—not only the patient’s confidence in the particular doctor
who “told,” but the confidence of the public in the whole medical
profession.

I do not think this reason bears any close investigation. Confidence
is destroyed quite as surely, though probably not so quickly, by
suppression of truth as by revealing it.

No, I believe we have to look deeper for the reason to explain this
attitude of medical hiding.

These diseases are set apart from all other sicknesses of our bodies.
For this reason, in considering them, moral considerations become
confused with practical values. And I do not see quite how this is to
be avoided. There is however, the gravest danger from such an attitude
which rests upon hidden personal prejudices, and is not dependent on
the facts of the case. Such an attitude leads inevitably to concealment
of truth, which is specially disastrous here, because it is absolutely
essential that these diseases, if they are to be cured, should be met
in the open and grappled with methodically and thoroughly.

For greater clearness, I may state the matter thus: There are three
attitudes that may be adopted towards sexual disease. First, that of
the pure moralist, who says only “This is a sin to be punished.” On
the opposite side is the purely utilitarian, who says, “This is only a
disease to be cured.” But both attitudes may be alike wrong or, more
correctly, the truth lies midway between the two. The disease, as a
disease, needs to be cured. This is the first step with which nothing
should interfere. But far different and much more complex is the
treatment required to alter the actions that lead to the disease.

As a first step, public opinion ought to condemn too late marriage,
instead of recommending it on economic grounds. The mania for making
economics the deciding factor in conduct should surely cease: the
falsity of this view has been exposed by many great writers, but much
stronger is the condemnation that must be given here by all who can
understand the evils that it has wrought in our sexual lives. Late
marriages must be one of the causes contributing to men’s use of
prostitutes before marriage.

We have to find a way out, to silence our shrieks of blame, and to give
up many of our old pretences. You can never get things right until you
honestly face them.

Women are the worst sinners. And I say, without hesitation, that it is
men’s fear of women, especially the husband’s fear of his wife, that is
the greatest hindrance to openness in this connection. It is women’s
attitude which holds us back in progress towards health.

Let me give an illustration. I attended recently a meeting where a
paper was read on the morals of men, in connection with the alarming
increase of venereal diseases since the war. The reader of the paper,
being a woman doctor as well as a feminist, took the wise view that the
most urgent question was not the reform of the men, but staying the
spread of the diseases. In the discussion that followed it was plainly
evident that few of the audience—all women—agreed with her. These were
women workers, who had read about, and to some limited extent, at any
rate, thought and studied, these questions. Yet the general view was
that men ought to be punished. One speaker, who stated that she was
married, said that no true woman could or ought to forgive a husband
who had become infected with a contagious disease.

Now, it is this view, here so crudely expressed, that has done so much
harm in the past. It explains also the continuance of the medical
secrecy that has acted so strongly against the stamping out of this
scourge of civilisation. Such an attitude of blame and unforgiveness on
the part of women has to be changed before the truth can be told safely.

Women are mainly responsible for the secrecy of these diseases. And
what is the result? Because these infectious diseases are secret they
are largely uncured.

It is, of course, easy to understand the attitude taken up by women.
Blame of men is not easily avoided; yet is there not confusion in
women’s minds?

The sin that a husband commits against his wife, a man against the girl
he is to marry—yes, and a son against the trust of his mother—is in
being unfaithful. Having caught the disease is a misfortune. The effect
must not be blamed by itself.

Let me illustrate this point of view by considering a different case.
Your child gets scarlet fever by an act of direct disobedience—the sin
of his age. He stays from school, without leave of absence, and goes to
play at a house he has been forbidden to enter. Would you, because of
his disobedience, refuse to pity and nurse him? Rather, would you not
forget his sin and desire only to help and heal him?

Do you see what I mean now? It is not that I would condone immoral
conduct in the husband or the lover that I plead for pity and
understanding on the part of women who love them.

Few men are intentionally evil. They do not even always act foolishly
in this question of infectious diseases because they are wantonly
careless. Often they are fully alive to the danger that may result to
their wives, or the girl they wish to make their wife, from their own
infection.

I repeat, they are not necessarily bad men, and they love their wives
and children; but they are cowards. All men are cowards when it comes
to facing the blame and misunderstanding of the woman they love.

If they cannot rely on the woman’s pity and help, few men will dare to
tell the truth; nor will they be willing to let the doctor tell the
facts for them. And if the truth cannot be told, it is very unlikely
that the infection will not be spread to others. This may lead to the
birth of diseased children, and who may say that in this case the crime
is the man’s alone?

Why can’t we face the situation now, when we are trying to tidy up our
social life? Concealments that may have been necessary in the old time
of ignorance are surely impossible now.

Is the evil to remain hidden, uncorrected, from one generation to
another? Hidden evil multiplies itself, and the sum is national
deterioration.

The mistake has been the muddleheaded thinking that has obscured the
plain and comparatively simple question of cure with the entirely
opposed problem of moral appraisement and punishment: a confusion and
losing of the way that has led us all inevitably into a forest-tangle
of difficulty, of lies and silences, and unanswerable questions.

And this heritage of wrong thinking is still compassing our feet,
binding them and throwing us down, as soon as we try to move a step
onwards: and until that entanglement is broken through, by bringing the
whole complicated position into the light of understanding and honest
thinking, the evil will go on, unchecked by our futile tearings here
and there at withered branches. The supporting stem of concealments and
dishonesty will flourish, and the devastating evil will continue to
spread.




THE MODERN WIFE AND THE OLD-FASHIONED HUSBAND


The old-fashioned husband is always older than his wife. If he is not
old in years, he is old in character. His desires and instincts are
aged. She is young because she is alive.

He wants to give her advice, but she will not listen. He desires to
guide her, or he must think that he does so. He protects her. Thinks
of her as young and precious and tender. He does not speak of certain
things before her. He caresses her, he pays her bills, gives her
presents, and treats her in the way, in which she has learnt not to
treat her children.

For the old-fashioned husband is conservative and hopelessly romantic.

The fact is he ever seeks in his wife the image of his mother, the
first woman whom he worshipped, and whose virtues remain as an
unforgettable pattern, ever to be repeated. He sees her darning
socks (horrible and useful occupation), making beds, dusting the
china, arranging flowers, brushing her husband’s overcoat and
smoothing his hat, fussing needlessly over everything. These
pictures are always interfering with the image of his wife—the new
woman of to-day, with her restless and noisy movements, her slang
and violence, her knowledge, capable management and clearness of
vision-that-look-you-straight-in-the-eyes air that belongs now to wives.

Why have women altered so greatly? Why have women gone on and left
their husbands behind?

It is common to refer everything back to the war. Certainly the war did
this—it sent both women and men into difficult schools but the men’s
school was harder and quite different from that of the women.

If the war had a devastating effect, the peace has likewise had for
women its revolutionary consequences. We all know what the war did. It
took women out of their homes. The feminists rejoiced to see women in
munition factories, on the platforms of trams, squeezed into government
offices, hoeing and driving the plough. Then the peace threw them
back; closed the open doors, cut off the day of financial prosperity,
re-introduced them to their children, if they had any, and to their
husbands.

And now what happened? What effect had this on the desires of women and
men?

Why, the husbands yearned for the old order of home and wife and
children. For the men had fought, they had experienced the uttermost
bitterness of life. Their petrified imagination had had no new ideals.
They wanted nothing changed. For them a terrible interlude was over, a
nightmare passed, that must be forgotten. But the non-combatant women
had not experienced war; they had only looked on. For many of them a
glamour of patriotic achievement in various kinds of work, which they
much preferred to the old domestic duties, added to the lure of high
wages, had thrown a cloak of romance over the war-period. They had
nothing to forget. The last thing they wanted was to go back, all their
desire was set on going forward.

Here then, is the reason why to-day there are so many modern wives with
old-fashioned husbands.

These war-trained women are very efficient; they impose their will on
everyone; they are attractive and very honest, but sometimes rather
aggressive with their assurance and massed information. They go to and
fro from their homes, when they like and how they like. The husband
knows almost nothing of his wife’s friends. He supposes it is all
right. But he understands that he cannot stop her, cannot control
her interests. She makes his house her home, is his friend and dear
companion, but she does not stay in his charge. Often he feels like a
stranger, helpless, not knowing what to do.

Wives are now almost more independent than husbands used to be. “I want
to do it, therefore, I must do it,” is their acknowledged cry. They
are on such good terms with life and with themselves that they cannot
imagine another view—the old view of the woman sacrificing herself.
There are quite a lot of things they won’t do; they are very simple
and straightforward about them.

Nowadays it is not fashionable for even young unmarried girls to
remain in the guarded shelter of the home. Old-fashioned fathers
and brothers, are sometimes alarmed at the freedom of friendship
allowed—the light-hearted pairing off. Life is a game, a dance, like
the figure in the lancers where you “visit” and waltz away, but then
come back to do the same thing with another partner. Yet these girls
are not without hearts; but they realise that they must know men before
they can choose the one man to whom they may give themselves. They
have almost nothing in common with the boneless emotional heroines
of the past. They are very practical and know that love will not pay
the baker’s bills, and after realising all this, they have schooled
themselves not to fall in love carelessly.

They look all life squarely in the face, understand their duties,
what they will do and will not do, in a way that may be hard, but is
admirably sane and admirably honest.

Here is an incident. An exceedingly modern girl was engaged by some
ill-chance to an old-fashioned man. She came once to talk with him of
her future and his. She was not fond of children and therefore, thought
she ought not to have any. Gently he placed his hand over hers, “That
will be as God wills, my darling.” She sprang from him, “It won’t,
Ronald, that’s not true, it will be as I arrange.”

It used to be so different. The old-fashioned girl could never have
spoken with such frankness. Wife or maid she was always younger than
the man she loved. She studied him, listened to him, quoted him. She
lived only in and through him. _At least that is what he thought._
He did not know that she did not really listen, was tired of his
stories, not interested in his business or his friends. All her seeming
submission and acceptance were used to hold him.

The opinions of the old-fashioned woman were quotations from authority;
her motto was obedience, but her practice was sweet rebellion. Very
rarely was she honest. Her eyes were so blinkered that she saw nothing
that she did not wish to see.

No, I am not sorry for old-fashioned men. They remain so childishly
blind. Let them grow up, or at least, conceal their paleolithic ideas.

The new types of modern women face the future with laughter and the
present with quickly responsive feeling. They give still to the
world the essential gift of the eternal feminine, though they are
cutting away the worn-out unreasonable exaggerations of perverted
femininity—the coldness of the vicious woman, the unkindness of the
grabbing woman, the ignorance and submission of the old-fashioned good
woman. They are able to see everything and to help in everything,
without being deceitful, without being dulled.




THE TEMPORARY GENTLEMAN AND HIS YOUNG WIFE


Everyone is busily trying to explain why there are so many unhappy
marriages at the present time, but few people seem to realise that one
of the most prolific causes has been the comparatively recent tendency
of women to marry out of their class. We all know that all social
distinctions were in abeyance during the war, and even afterwards.
Normal class separations, conventional standards, old careful habits of
conduct have been largely broken through at a time of great uncertainty
and many changes.

Some of us hoped that this new co-operation which seemed to be
springing up between men and women of different social classes would
lead to permanent changes. We forgot that excitement is the most potent
intoxicant, and that after excitement there is usually a falling back
into dullness and apathy. But certainly for a time there was quite
a new loosening of the guiding-rein of reason, that has allowed the
horses of impulse and instinct freer than ever before to pull the car
of ourselves and our fates in this direction and in that, just as they
chose.

The many misfit marriages bear witness to the excited condition of
women.

And it ought not to be difficult to realise, with the least gift of
imagination, the conflict and the unhappiness, almost necessarily
resulting, from such unions, entered into during that period of
topsy-turvy conditions, between the man who had “risen” and the
more complicated type of modern girl—the girl of brains and nerves,
passionate, intellectually emancipated and delighting in her new-gained
freedom; yet, at the same time, fastidious, ruled by traditions and
inherited habits, which crop up unexpectedly, with a conservatism that
is neither acknowledged nor reckoned with.

The men who in commerce or in war had a meteoric success have, in many
cases, fallen back; they are but clerks, shop-assistants, artisans.
They themselves, and everything belonging to them seem different. While
they were accepted as gentlemen, because of what they had done or the
money they had made, they married “above them” as the phrase is. And
now when the money is spent and what they did no longer remembered,
they cannot find work that will enable them to maintain the outward
show of being a gentleman. The intoxication of excitement is over, and
their wives complain, not only of their position, but of them.

The temporary gentleman and his young wife, in many cases, are finding
that it needs a lot of grit and a lot of duty to keep in love. For
the rose-coloured glasses of courtship have been replaced by the blue
goggles of matrimony. They are already unhappy, though they expected
happiness. You see, their love has been tested by the love-destroying
test of poverty. And these difficult days have cast their homes into
disorder.

We have all felt the world’s wave of trade depression: the world’s
difficulties have dealt a blow, causing a leak to spring in many a
frail boat of domestic happiness, so that its inexperienced navigators
no longer can exercise control over the journey.

Now it is customary to blame the wife. Always it is the woman’s fault.
She is, or ought to be, the home-maker. While no one seems to consider
how much depends on the character, or conditions, of the home she is
asked to make.

The boarding-school-educated and college girl has never been trained
to perform or to endure the difficult, necessary duties of the poor
man’s home. In their girlhood’s homes and luxurious schools, everything
was done for them. That was in the old, almost-forgotten days of cheap
domestic service.

In no other direction, perhaps, has there been so great and so
far reaching changes as in the homes of the so-called upper classes.
In a sense, to-day we have no homes, only places in which we sleep,
and sometimes eat. For the domestic work of preparing the food and
keeping the home as a place to live in and not to escape from has, in
great measure, ended; duties which once it was every woman’s pride
to do well, have been allowed to slip, as far as possible, into the
hands of hired experts. In the old days cooking and housekeeping, and
even house-cleaning, were known to all women. Every wife was expected
to enter into competition with other wives in the important matters of
making bread and cakes, and in making jams and jellies and puddings.

But the home, with its old full activities, has passed out of the hands
of the mistress. So to-day a girl often finds herself forced to learn
the very elements of the routine day of the wage-earner’s wife. And the
duties that have to be learnt are many of them disagreeable as well as
immensely tiring and monotonous to unaccustomed hands.

I do not, however, believe that the knife-and-fork aspect of these
marriages is the fundamental aspect. It is love itself that is at
fault. The strain and the jar of daily living under these difficult
restless conditions have been too great, especially for the women.

The passing from one way of living, from one station of society to
another, is always a hard and unpleasant process. We do not always know
it or admit it, even if we _do know_, but the small, almost unnoticed
differences in habits and manners are harder to tolerate than many a
more fundamental cleavage.

I want to labour this point. The most frequent causes of trouble in
those marriages where there is poverty and a restricted life, are born,
I am certain, out of the daily fret of uncomfortable and cheap living
together, out of small ugly minor habits of omissions, and stupidities.

Romantics may deny this, but what most wears and frays the love of
wives are just trifles so small that very rarely is their adverse
action directly noticed. But they give an escape for the concealed
hostility, and set up an almost indecent and fearfully intolerant
irritation. Dirty finger nails, the murdering of words, or making
a noise when you eat soup, may be much harder to bear than real
unkindness and anger. The failure to rise and give up a chair or to
open a closed door may seem greater neglect to a wife than the absence
of money to buy presents. The roughness of the “rough diamond” becomes
unbearable. Things that once did not seem to matter, now matter
tremendously.

Of course this is illogical, but then love is illogical.

And month by month as it passes makes the marriage more broken. The
disappointment goes deeper though the irritation may, perhaps, be
less frankly expressed. This is the time of the real danger. It is
the wife’s own love that is failing her, much more than anything her
husband may do or not do.

The difficulty of finding suitable work, the differences in friends and
in the accustomed spheres of life, could be overcome were it not for
the _unconscious want of will to overcome them_. The man may feel that
he would do better farming in Canada than here. It is a very certain
indication that the woman has ceased to love him wholeheartedly if
she objects to accompany him on the ground that all her friends are in
England.

Love does not hesitate: it delights to give up and to sacrifice.

You will see what this means: It is rather the _hidden feelings that
make conscious social difference_, that act and are far stronger than
the difference itself.

The unacknowledged failure in Love, not anything that happens
outwardly, is the real trouble that gnaws at the root of content in
their marriages, and rots and breaks the bond.

Yet there is a bright side to these marriages even when they fail. The
socially adventurous, the breakers of conventions, must expect trouble;
but they may console themselves by reflecting that they are pioneers in
opposing dead traditions. Only the tall trees sway in the breeze, the
dwarf plants are ingloriously safe.




IS MARRIAGE TOO EASY?


On the subject of marriage I have written again and again, not alone
in these essays, but in many of my other books. I would, however, wish
to say now, and with all the power I have, that in England, marriage
is made too easy. If some of the restrictions which are placed against
the breaking of the marriage bond were transferred to the time when the
bond is made it would be well.

We prevent too late. Always we run to shut the stable door after the
horse is stolen.

Many amazing marriages are made, in particular, by the very young who
to-day refuse, more fiercely than even before, any guidance from the
old; reckless marriages, entered into by those who have known each
other for a few days only before marrying for life.

An ever-increasing freedom and independence for the young has certainly
had rather a startling moral result. It has been shewn that for all
ordinary young men and women intimate association with each other in
college, in business, in workshops, and factories, and in play, turns
them with extreme readiness to love making. Now I am very far indeed
from wishing to apportion blame, but I do hold that new conditions
demand—not only changes in our thoughts and judgment, but revision of
the laws formulated to restrict conduct.

A minister of religion stated publicly, not very long ago, “I have had
to marry many couples who admitted to me they knew little about each
other. I could do nothing. I was not allowed to refuse marriage.”

The many marriages made in haste and under the pressure of sudden
emotional urgencies, are a sign of the nervous condition of the
times. The customary criticisms of reason are not heard, or not until
the emotional storm has subsided. This is, of course, a condition
not infrequent in love, but in these rushing and exciting days of
dancing-partners and jazz courtships, it is greatly exaggerated, such
marriages may not unfortunately bear the scrutiny of minds restored to
reason. Living together is found to be a different and far harder thing
than dancing together. And this has led to the unprecedented demand for
divorce which should cause no surprise or lamentation, but should urge
us forward to face the situation, like spurs in the flesh of a tired
horse. For the disgrace is, not that these marriages should end, but
that they should ever have begun.

We English are too afraid of preventative interference: we wait until
something is very wrong indeed and then we punish.

It would be salutary for us to consider the more careful regulations of
other lands. In France, for instance, and in Belgium no encouragement
is given for hurried marriages such as we permit. Official enquiries
and the consent of parents and guardians are considered necessary. From
the start the greatest care is exercised. _Fiançailles_ (engagements)
are regarded as serious family events, more binding and more sacred
than anything to which we are accustomed. Both the engagement
and the marriage are affairs of the utmost importance to the two
families concerned as well as to the young people themselves. There
are discussions and careful arrangements, and months of testing of
suitability for life-partnership, during which the future husband and
wife get to know one another before being tied by marriage. Perhaps,
this is why the crime of bigamy is very rare in France, and there is no
such thing known as cases for breach of promise of marriage.

I know, of course, the many and great evils that are attendant on the
French system, but to me it seems that these could easily be avoided
as they arise entirely out of property considerations and the wife’s
dowry—considerations which so inevitably act disastrously on moral
conduct.

It would, I am certain, lessen the chance of endless unhappiness in
marriage and prevent many divorces if some more fixed inquiries,
with—in the case of any one (shall I say, under twenty-five?) the
consent of one parent of either party, if living, if not, that of a
guardian, were obligatory before the marriage could be entered into. Or
if the young will not accept this parental authority, marriage could be
made conditional, except under very special reasons, on the betrothal
months having lasted for a fixed and sufficiently long period: at least
inquiry should be made as to the amount of knowledge the partners have
gained of each other. I would recommend these reforms to all who are
concerned for the future of marriage.

Nor need the change be difficult or would it entail any great
alterations in the machinery of the law. We appoint a King’s Proctor
to inquire into domestic details to prevent unsuitable marriages being
broken, why not change his duties to prevent unsuitable marriages being
made?

I would urge also that Commandments of Marriage are formulated to be
read to every couple at their betrothal and again before the wedding
ceremony takes place, as is done to some limited extent in France and
Belgium and in one or two other countries. This is another duty which
might be undertaken by the department of the King’s Proctor.

Here, then, is a practical way in which we might wisely copy other
civilisations whose customs are more carefully planned to safeguard
marriage and help the young in right living.

I must press home this question of the dangers of too easy marriage,
though I risk wearying my readers by repetition. The facilities we
give the young for marrying in haste, is, I affirm again, the cause
mainly responsible in the greater number of marriages that come to
the disaster of the Divorce Courts. This I have proved already. It is
responsible also for many cases of bigamy, a crime which has increased
alarmingly in the last years. Our law of breaches of marriage promises,
with its frequent misuse and extortion of hushmoney, is another cause
dependent on our stupid neglect to regulate marriage. It leads to many
unsuitable marriages being made, which very often have their fatal
sequel of separation or divorce.

Nor does the disaster end here. Our present careless laws are certainly
acting to bring marriage itself to discredit. We hurry young people
within its bonds, freeing them from all obligations to their families
or to society in this matter of choosing their life’s partner, and then
later, if disaster overtakes them, with callous irony we say, “you have
made your bed, you must lie on it.”

If we desire really to preserve marriage, let us treat marriage with
seriousness. As I have said in another of these essays—Marriage is not
considered a vocation: it has become a game. I would urge practical
and prompt action. We are, I think, bound to realise that if we are
to succeed in freeing our society from the evils which all of us are
deploring, our attention must shift from attempts to _punish after
wrong has been done_, to removing the causes that _lead certainly to
wrong being done_.

In other words we have to formulate more practical and helpful laws.
Even more important is to change public thought, cleansing men and
women from their desire to punish and replacing instead the desire to
help and to understand. Nothing else, in my opinion, can avert even
greater disasters of license in the future than those we are facing.




PASSIONATE FRIENDSHIPS


I had wished to write these essays without too frequent mention of the
war. I find, however, that such avoidance is almost impossible. For the
war has, in the most effective way, made prominent all the problems of
sexual conduct with which I am dealing, has done this so effectively
that some way out must be found. New and even startling changes have
come and are coming, and have to be faced. Certainly our judgments
can never be the same. Many who never before thought about these
things have been made to think. All of us have seen more plainly the
ineffectiveness of much that always before we had accepted. No longer
can we cover our eyes with the comfortable mid-Victorian bandages.
There has ended for every one of us our blind-man’s-buff game with life.

We are caught: and it is well. The unwritten commandment of sexual
conduct, that anything may be done as long as the doing of it may be
hidden, can never, I think, again be accepted, unless, indeed, by
the very good, whose entire lack of humour makes them able to accept
anything.

Whether we like it or not most of us have got now to muck-rake into the
dark bye-paths of conduct.

Now, it is easy to say that this urgent concern with sexual questions
arises from decadence. I do not believe it. To me it has always seemed
that this growing demand for inquiry affords the surest hope for the
future. Much is being thrown on to the scrap-heap of life. This is
done only when there is need for it. We, who have come to see and in
some measure to understand, have got to be concerned with sex and its
problems, until some of its wrongs are righted.

Here I must digress to make a necessary explanation. The special
problem of sexual conduct which now I wish to consider—the very
difficult problem of passionate friendships between men and women who,
for one reason or another, are unable or do not wish to marry, is a
question to which my interest has for very long been directed. I was
first asked to write about it in 1913 (how remote that time now seems)
in answer to two articles that had appeared in the _English Review_, in
July and August of that year, _Women and Morals_ and _Men and Morals_,
supposed to have been written, the one by “A Mother,” and the other
by “A Father;” but which, as later transpired, were thought out and
transcribed in the office, by the Editor and sub-Editor of that then
courageous journal.

But to whatever journalistic trickery they owed their origin, the
interest of those articles remained unchanged. I need not wait to
describe them; their importance rested in the courage and truth with
which they faced the difficult problem, at that time almost always
hidden or sentimentalised over, of the sex-needs of men and women apart
from marriage.

I was asked to answer—I had, as it were, to sum up, sift out, weigh and
judge, what was said in both articles. I did not then know anything of
their bastard authorship, and I accepted. My answer appeared in the
September number of the Review. At the time it gained some attention.
In America the three articles were republished together. The little
book, called “Women and Morals” had an exceedingly attractive cover and
an excellent preface: I believe it sold widely. More amusing and also,
I think, more witness to the power of my work, was a very different
kind of notoriety which, in one quarter at least, it achieved in this
country. It aroused anger. The number of the _English Review_ in which
it appeared was, I believe, burnt publicly in an Advanced Club for
women by order of the ladies who then formed the committee. For their
intense virtue considered my views too horrible to remain uncleansed
by fire. (Excuse my laughing, but the fact is I always do laugh when I
picture this incident—those splendidly blinkered women holding solemnly
in extended fire-tongs that burning review!)

My work was immoral!

Immoral! What is it that people mean? I do not know. I am for morality
and always shall be. That is, indeed, why I offend. I am always wanting
to turn out dirty places and to spring-clean life. And I have to show
things as I find them, not as I would like them to be. It is so easy if
you drug your soul and place blinkers over your intelligence. But you
cannot be moral if you are over-occupied with being nice.

It is the young, not the old, who are thinking and writing to-day.
Let me give you an example that exactly fits this question we are
considering.

By a somewhat suggestive coincidence there appeared an article on
“Youth and Marriage” in the _English Review_ for May, 1923—the last
number issued under the editorship of Mr. Austin Harrison—which very
strikingly repeats, but more openly and with cruder emphasis, almost
everything that was said in the three articles published in 1913.
It treats the same difficult and still unsettled question of sexual
relationships outside of marriage. The article gives the answer of
youth to the old, who are criticising and condemning the friendships
and new freedom of sex intimacy between young women and young men: they
are told frankly that they fail to realise the changed conditions of
present-day life. The name of the writer of this interesting article,
Vera M. Garrell, is unknown to me, but I take this opportunity of
thanking her. Her article has given me the greatest pleasure. All the
facts are considered in a refreshingly candid, if not always entirely
adequate way. (1) The increased enormous disparity between the numbers
of the sexes, which the writer comments upon as “an outstanding tragedy
of the war;” leading as it must do, to “an unhealthy competition to
attract men,” under the urge of which girls are drawn “to use coarser
measures and act on bolder lines,” if they are to escape “the dark
dread that haunts the average girl of being ‘left on the shelf.’” (2)
The economic factors, which cause marriage to become increasingly
difficult, and thus act in lowering the marriage ideal by making a
permanent union so remote that it comes to be regarded as “practically
impossible.” “The young people of to-day are very much realists. They
intensely dislike poverty.” A great deal is said about this “economic
blockade against marriage,” and the writer maintains that “much of the
laxity in sexual morals is the direct outcome of this position.” (3)
Yet, even deeper in their action are the inner reasons. War has left
the youth of to-day “with a kind of sexual neurosis.” For years it kept
life “entirely physical;” “morality was at a discount,” the inescapable
result has been that “youth has been lured into sexual compromise.” The
old code of morality has failed: it does not meet the new demands.

I have been impressed and sharply hurt at the bitterness and fatalism
underneath what is written. Let me quote one or two sentences. “The
charge against youth is correct. He is in revolt against conventional
morality. _Young men and young women are sex conscious, not on the old
lines of retiring from intimacy, but rather in the opposite direction
of intimacy._” And again, “Every sex companionship is born of _mutual
recognition of social grievances_. Where it is possible for men and
women to come together and form friendships they do so, _without any
regard for the commital convention that marriage must be the object_.”
(The italics in the passages are mine.)

It is insisted upon that every normal person has a right to
self-expression in the sex-function, while further frank
acknowledgement is made that when sex-friendship “_is unregulated it
ends in vice_.” “_We shall not marry so why not enjoy ourselves_,” is
the prevailing philosophy of those who have ceased to regard the sexual
act as immoral. (Again the italics are mine).

Now, all this has set me thinking that it is worth while to restate
certain propositions in connection with these friendships of passion,
which I made first in the article I wrote in 1913. I do this for two
reasons. First I would like to assure the young, who to-day are more
than ever impatient of, and condemnatory of, the old, that the old are
not always ignorant and that some of them, too, have tried honestly
to face this difficult problem of sexual conduct. The second reason
is deeper. A sickness of soul cries out from so much that the young
say to-day. I want to end this. And the only way in which I know to do
this in connection with these unregulated friendships is to _have them
regulated_.

It is ridiculous to say as so many of the young do to-day that sexual
relationships between two people affect no one but themselves, unless a
child is born. It is not true. The partners in even the strongest and
purest union have no right to say to society, “This is our business and
none of yours.” The consequences may be so grave and wide-reaching for
society that the sex-deed can never be confined to the pair concerned.

And I would go further even than this. For the sexual partnership that
is kept secret, almost of necessity, will work anti-socially. Just in
the same way as in any other secret partnership, opportunity will be
given to those who desire to escape from the responsibilities of the
partnership. This inevitably leads to the commital of sin, by those
who are weak and unfixed in character. While other men and women of
higher conscience, who wish to, and would act honourably, often find
the way so difficult that they fail in their endeavours—lose themselves
in the dark and tangled ways of concealment. Many unions that now are
shameful, would not have been shameful, if the partners had not been
drawn into deceitful concealments, that cannot fail to act in a way
disastrous to love.

This problem of Passionate Friendships, like all problems of sexual
conduct, demands something more than emotional treatment; it requires
the most careful consideration of many different sets of facts, that
often rise up in what seem to be direct opposition.

I must follow this a little further. The sex-needs are almost always
dealt with as though they stood apart and lay out of line with any
other need or faculty of our bodies. This is, in part, due to secrecy
which has kept sex as something mysterious. We have most of us been
trained from our childhood into indecent secretiveness. There is as
well deeper trouble, and it will be a long time before we can change
it. Sex is so powerful in most of us, and occupies really so large
a part of our attention, that we are afraid of ourselves, and this
re-acts in fear of any open acknowledgement of our sex-needs.

It is necessary before we can even begin to judge this question of
passionate friendships, to face very frankly this tremendous force
of the sex-impulses, for the most part veiled in discussion. Next to
hunger this is the most imperative of our needs, and, indeed, to-day
sex enters more into conscious thought than hunger. For the hunger
needs of most of us are satisfied, while the sex-needs are thwarted and
restrained in all kinds of ways, and thus insist themselves the more
insistently in our thoughts. Here is some slight explanation why so
many of our judgments about sex are so arbitrary and so unforgiving.
In penalising the sexual misconduct of others we are really passing
judgment, though we do not know it, on our ourselves in blaming them we
gain a curious kind of vicarious salvation, which brings the peace of
self-forgiveness. In devising punishments for others, we are fixing a
compensatory sacrifice for our deeply buried wishes, which never having
found relief, either in direct expression or by sublimation, remain to
torment us with ceaseless conflicts in our unconscious life.

I must not follow this further. Anyone with knowledge of the new
psychology will understand what I mean.

Now, what I want to emphasise is that, to some limited extent at any
rate, this system of self-concealments and lies is being broken,
or if that view is too hopeful, at least the point of view has
shifted. Indeed it is the acceptance of the imperative force of sex
hunger, and the frank recognition of the present position—a fearless
acknowledgment of the natural right of every adult woman as well as man
to sex experience, that renders so noteworthy the change in outlook
between this generation and the last. The youth of to-day have been
fearless enough to cry aloud desires that the men and women of my
generation, either denied or whispered about. Within its limits (and
I am bound to say that, in my opinion, these limits are badly fixed
and very narrow), this is the most truthful generation that yet has
existed. I am glad to have lived to know it.

It is true that the many difficult problems of sexual conduct, of
which we hear so much and so continuously, in almost every case are
approached from one side only—the personal-pleasure side. That is why
there is so much waste and foolishness. It explains too, why there
is no consistent and united movement; no attempt at trying to find
for everyone some possible decent way out—an escape from the terrible
conditions which we are all agreed exist under the difficulties and
strain of our under-controlled and over-civilised life.

A new conception of morality is, indeed, called for, but we have to
be clearer as to what it is to be and where it is taking us. You will
see at once what I mean. Until new safeguards are established, the old
restriction cannot safely be loosened. It is too dangerous. The brief
passionate partnership must entail disaster, in particular for the
woman. She must still pay the heavier price of love. For what do these
partnerships really mean? There can be no glossing with talk about
freedom here. It is the old solution, the giving by the woman _without
security_, what is given by the woman who is married under security and
permanence.

I do not believe this can be accepted as an established and permitted
thing as soon as we come to consider the lasting results.

It is an essential part of sexual morality, as I conceive it, that in
any relation between the two sexes—I care not whether the association
be legal or illegal, recognised or unrecognised—the position of the
woman, _as the potential mother_ must be made secure. This is a social,
not a private matter. As such it has always been accepted by a wise
State: it is the disgrace of our lax civilisation that too often to-day
it is forgotten or ignored.

We come then to this—How can provision be made for honourable
partnerships with _security for the woman_ outside of marriage? For
I am altogether persuaded that this provision must be made in order
to harmonise our sexual life, and meet the desires of a large and
increasing number of young people, whose exceptional needs our existing
institutions and customs ignore or crush.

We must all of us know from our experience of life that many women
as well as men are by their temperaments unsuited for monagonious
marriage—the living permanently with one partner for life. Often,
I would even say as a rule, these individuals are strongly sexual.
They will not, because with the character they have, they cannot,
live for any long period celibate. They will marry to gain permanent
sexual relief or, if they are men, they will buy temporary relief from
prostitutes, unless they are able to seek satisfaction in an irregular
union.

Now, I affirm it as my conviction that the first and second of these
courses are likely to lead to greater misery and sin than the third
course; and of the three, the first, in my opinion, is the worst. I
have, no doubt at all on this matter. No one, who is not blind to the
facts of life, can close their eyes to the evil and suffering that
certainly follows, when permanent marriage is entered into by those
people who are unfitted _and do not desire_ to fulfil the obligations
and duties of living faithfully with one partner. And I would ask all
those who stand in fear of change or reform, and cannot contemplate
any open toleration of wider opportunities for sexual friendships to
consider this fact: the discredit which has fallen upon marriage arises
largely from the demoralising lives lived under its cover by those
unsuited for enduring mating.

It is commonly taken for granted that love and passion in men is quite
different from love and passion in women. I am sure this is not true.
It is very necessary to break down the idea that for the impulses of
sex, with their immense complications and differences, there is one
general rule. Nor is it possible, I am sure, to make any for arbitrary
judgments. To me the man or woman who is able to live in faithful love
with one partner is not necessarily better than the man or woman who
is not so able. I may prefer the one type, and dislike the other, but
that again is a matter of personal judgment. We cannot safely class
those who differ from ourselves as wrong, and set them down as fit only
for suppression and education. We have to put aside the old shrieks of
blame that are possible only to the ignorant.

It is all very well to preach the ideal of complete sexual abstinence
until marriage, but there are the clear, hard conditions of
contemporary circumstances for all but the really rich, who can marry
when they want to do so without other considerations, and the very poor
who marry young because they have nothing at all to consider. We have
to face the presence among us to-day of an amount of suffering through
enforced celibacy, which is acting in many directions in degrading our
sexual lives. Any number of these sufferers, both the unmarried and
the married who are ill-mated, are everywhere amongst us. I need not
wait to prove this: the facts face us all, unless, indeed, we are too
wilfully blind and too prejudiced to see what is happening.

I would propose as a first step towards honesty and health, that we
ought to claim an open declaration of the existence of any form of
sexual relationship between a woman and a man. We shall, I believe,
have to do it, if not now, then later, because we are finding out the
evils that must ensue, both to the individuals concerned and to the
society of which they are members, by forcing men and women into the
dark, immoral way of concealments.

I believe if there were some open recognition of these partnerships
outside of marriage, not necessarily permanent, with proper provision
for the woman and her children, should there be any, a provision not
dependent on the generosity of the man and made after the love which
sanctioned the union had waned, but decided upon by the man and woman
in the form of a contract before the relationships were entered upon,
there would be many women ready to undertake such unions gladly; there
would even be some women as well as men, who, I believe, would prefer
them to permanent marriage, which binds them to one partner for life
and as a rule entails mutual living together and the giving up by the
woman of her work or profession. In this way many marriages would be
prevented which inevitably come to disaster. It is also possible that
such friendship-contracts might, under present disastrous conditions,
be made by those who are unsuitably mated and yet are unable or do
not wish to entirely sever the bond between them, with some other
partner they could love. Such contracts would open up possibilities of
honourable partnership to many who must suffer from enforced sexual
abstinence or be driven into hateful concealed intimacies.

I do not think we need fear to do this. My own faith in monogamous
marriage, the living together of one man and one woman for the life of
both, as the most practical, the best, and the happiest form of union
for the great majority of people, is so strongly rooted that I do not
wish, because I hold it unnecessary, to force anyone either to enter or
stay within its bonds. I want them to do this because they themselves
want to be bound. We get further and further away from real monogamy
by allowing no other form of honourable partnerships.

Under present conditions and the prejudice of social opinion, the
penalties that have to be paid in particular by women, for any sexual
relationship outside of marriage are too heavy. This is manifest as
I have, to some extent, pointed out already. Indeed when we consider
the difficulties faced in these unions, that so many do take the risks
is another proof, if one were needed of the elemental strength of the
sex-impulse. But mark this: it is only those whose social conscience
is for some reason unawakened who can enter into these irregular
relationships except under special and very exceptional circumstances,
until some steps have been taken to regulate them. They may be willing
to take the risk for themselves, but they know, or perhaps I had better
say _ought to know_, that the payment may fall also on the child of
their love. You may say—there need be no children. This is true. It
makes the conditions of such love much easier. It is not, however, a
solution and can never, I think, be accepted as such by women. The
woman who loves a man wants to be the mother of a child by him. I shall
be told that there are women of whom this is not true. I know this. But
that does not make it less true that the great majority of women can
find the completion of their love only in the child.

It would, of course, be easy to raise any number of objections against
these contract-partnerships, some of which might well prove true.
It may be said, for instance, that the economic difficulties that
now prevent marriage would not be lessened, but increased, by these
extra-conjugal relationships. This is a question on which so much ought
to be said that I feel compelled to say almost nothing, as I cannot now
treat it adequately. I can only say that I have in my mind some scheme
of insurance, which might easily be contributed to by both partners of
the contract, but which would go to the woman for her own provision,
and that of any children of the union in case of separation. If this
once became established as a custom (a kind of marriage settlement,
but without the marriage) necessary between all entering into such
partnerships, the practice would gain the support of public opinion. It
is done frequently now, but secretly. What I want is that it should
be done openly, as a right and not a favour. It would then be possible
to take another step in the form of State endowment for parenthood;
this might be an extension of endowment for legal motherhood and
mother’s pensions, and by doing this would follow another and, perhaps,
even greater gain. The recognition of these contract-partnerships
would prevent the ostracism which even to-day falls on the discarded
mistress. There are many women who dread this much more than poverty.
The whole question of any sexual relationships outside of marriage in
the past has been left in the gutter, so to speak. Everything has been
blotted in darkness and made disgraceful by concealment. This would be
changed.

May not something be done now, when in so many directions we are
being forced to consider these questions, to establish sanction to
meet new needs? Partnerships other than marriage have had a place as
a recognised and guarded institution in many older and more primitive
societies, and it may be that the conditions brought upon us may act in
forcing upon us a similar acceptance.

We have got to recognise that our form of monogamous marriage cannot
meet the sex-needs of all people. To assert that it can do this is
to close our eyes to the known facts. Something has got to be done.
The extending of the opportunities of honourable love must be faced
before we can hope for more moral conditions of life. It is the results
that have almost always followed these irregular unions that have
branded them as anti-social acts. But the desertion of women with the
inevitable resulting evils, which has arisen so frequently from the
conditions of secrecy under which they now exist, would be put an end
to. One reason why extra-conjugal relationships are discredited is
because it is often almost impossible to avoid disaster. Make these
partnerships honourable and there will be much greater chances of
honourable conduct. I spoke just now of the sacrifice of women. But in
love there is no such thing as sacrifice for a woman; there is the joy
of giving. The sacrifice arises out of the conditions of concealment
and blame under which the duties and joys of love so often have had to
be fulfilled.

I do not see how we can forbid or treat with contempt any partnership
that is openly entered into and in which the duties undertaken are
faithfully fulfilled. It is our attitude of blame that has, in
the past, so often made this honourable fulfilment of obligations
impossible.

I have sought to put these matters as plainly as may be in the
conviction that nothing can be gained by concealment. Anyone who writes
on the subject of sexual conduct is very open to misconceptions. It is
not realised that the effort of the reformer is not to lessen at all
the bonds in any sexual partnership, rather the desire is to strengthen
them. But the forms of the partnership will have to be more varied;
unless, indeed, we prefer to accept unregulated and secret vice. We
shall, I do most sincerely believe, have more morality in too much
wideness than in too little.

I can anticipate a further objection that will certainly be raised.
Why, I shall be asked, if sexual relationships are to be acknowledged
and protected outside of marriage, preserve marriage at all? I have
answered this question already. _Monogamous marriage will be maintained
because the great majority of women and men want it to be maintained._
I affirm again my own belief in the monogamic union: the ideal marriage
is that of the man and woman who have dedicated themselves to each
other for the life of both, faithfully together to fulfil the duties
of family life. This is the true monogony: this is the marriage which
I regard as sanctified. But, I, regarding it as a holy state, would
preserve it for those suited for the binding duties of the individual
home so intimately connected with it.

The contract-partnerships I have suggested will do nothing to change
the sanctity of any true marriages. There will always remain a penalty
to those who seek variety in love, in that unrest which is the other
side of variety. And the answer I would give to those who fear an
increase of immorality from any provision for sexual partnerships
outside of permanent marriage is, that no deliberate change in our
sexual conduct can conceivably make moral conditions worse than they
are at present. As a matter of fact every form of irregular union
exists to-day, but shamefully and hidden. The only logical moral
objection that I can think of being advanced against an honourable
recognition of these partnerships is that, by doing away with all
necessity for concealments their number is likely to be larger than if
the old penalties are maintained. This is undoubtedly true: it is also
true that it is the only possible way in which they can cease to be
shamefull. Prohibitions and laws, however stringent, can do nothing.
The past has proved their failure; they will fail still worse in the
future.

Nor is the change really so great or so startling as at first it
may appear to be. Our marriage in its present form is primarily an
arrangement for the protection of the woman and the family. What I want
is that some measure, at least, of the protection now given to the
legal wife, shall be afforded to all women who fulfil the same duties.
I am not seeking to make immorality easier; as I have before insisted,
that is very far from my purpose. These changes for which I am pleading
will make immorality much harder, for it will not be so easy as now it
is to escape from the responsibilities of love.

No one can suppose, of course, that this change can be other than
gradual. There will be no stage at which a large section of society
will give up the accepted custom and stand perplexed as to how they
shall readjust their sexual conduct. Any movement towards openness and
honesty must be gradual. The process of change will be in the future,
what has always happened in the past, the slow abandonment of worn-out
conventions, and a trial of new paths, first by the few, to be followed
by an ever-increasing number. When the need for a change arises then
does a change come.

I assert again there need be no fear.

It is one of the deepest and healthiest instincts of men and women that
they have always fought for liberty to love, and have rebelled whenever
the restrictions and conditions of society have borne too hardly
upon them. There is first a period of dull acquiescence, followed
certainly by a reaction towards pleasure and sin—the grabbing to take
what has been withheld by any means and in any form; but afterwards
comes rebellion—the true movement towards purity; the deep desire of a
return to health, necessitating always the breaking through from all
hindering barriers, so that the intolerable burden of sin may be cast;
a glad imperative effort to gain liberty, to live rightly and joyously.

It is the young who to-day have a new consciousness of the right of
freedom. They will never again accept the ancient restrictions. And it
is well. We, who are older, whose steps are faltering and whose eyes
grow dim with waiting for the vision we have seen, look to them to gain
liberty, to re-establish the sanctity of love, which we have tried to
do and failed.

But the young must shake off every symptom of the prevalent and
contagious anaemia of fatalism that limits everything to the personal
issues, before they can formulate and carry through any really
constructive work of reform. They must learn to distinguish more
clearly between cause and effect, the means and the end. At present
they place the horse after the cart and mistake the power for the
product. We are all apt to suppose conduct and feelings are the outcome
of conditions and laws. They are not: they are the origin of them. When
we have all got the desire for right and honourable conduct and honest
conduct and honest feelings both about marriage and every form of
sexual partnership, we shall get living and helpful laws.

What is the use of tinkering with what is moribund? A great teacher has
said, “Let the dead bury their dead; come and preach the good and the
new thing.”




CONCLUSION

REGENERATION


I have dared to think of a regeneration of our sexual lives through
education and a fuller understanding of the meaning of love. But by
education must be understood all that influences the desires and
imagination, so that in every direction we shall be turned to seek
health and clean living.

Our supine acceptance of so many things that are wrong ought to arouse
us to shame. What are we going to do?

Are we content to go on in the muddles that so long we have accepted
without much consideration? Are we satisfied to allow all the evil to
continue because we are too lazy and too dishonest to face them in
truth and demand a clearance? We are all responsible; you, my readers,
and I. If we demand saner and more practical conditions we shall get
them.

But do we care—I mean care sufficiently to seek and to find the way of
escape? Ah, that is the question!

Fear has been the hot-bed wherein have been forced rank plants of
shame, dishonesty and trickery, of uncleanness, of concealments, of
persecution and punishments—plants of persistent but unhealthy growth,
that insistently and riotously spring up to hinder the workers, who
strive ever to clear the soil of the fair Garden of Love, from the rank
and choking growths.

What wonder, indeed, that we have lost our way so that still we are
wandering in the jungle, unable to steer a straight course through the
rough and tortuous paths left to us as a legacy from the past. It is
this confusion that is hindering us to-day. And our real task is to
cut through the jungle, and force clear paths, so that again we may
have good roads in an open country on which we may walk gladly and
fearlessly.

Yet, it were unwise to be too hopeful. We cannot be architects of life.
Each generation will make new mistakes, even do they escape the follies
that are old. We can see a very short way along the path of life, and
often we are confused. The wisest amongst us are only bricklayers, and
the best can but lay two or three bricks in a lifetime. Our work is to
do that if we can. We can guess very feebly at the whole design. Many
mistakes must be made by us, as they have been by those before us, and
often it may be the duty of a new generation to pull down the work that
in sorrow we have toiled to build up.




FOOTNOTES:

[1] The English Edition was translated from the French Edition.

[2] See a most instructive pamphlet, “The Conflicts of the Child,” by
Edith and Dr. Eder, reprinted from “Child Study,” 1917.

[3] See the pamphlet to which already reference has been made.

[4] This frequently quoted statement was made by Lombroso and not by
Krafft-Ebing as almost everyone seems to think. It is significant that
the women on the study of whose sexuality this judgment was founded
were of the prostitute class. See _La Donna Delinquente_, etc., p.p.
54-56.




INDEX


  A

  Adoption of Children 61;
    law needed 61 _et seq._;
    fears and dangers in 62 _et seq._


  B

  Birth control 37 _et seq._, 163.

  Boys, seduction of 113 _et seq._, 119 _et seq._


  C

  Cats, 15;
    their qualities compared with those of women 16 _et seq._

  Child, effect of birth control on 39;
    feeling of inferiority in 49;
    inferiority and crime in 49;
    must rebel 51 _et seq._ 82, 94, 103;
    adoption of, law of needed 61;
    faults and crimes of 73 _et seq._ 99;
    in prison 73 _et seq._;
    at modern school 79 _et seq._;
    at play 81;
    sex education of 87 _et seq._, 107 _et seq._;
    early manifestation of sex in 88 _et seq._;
    savagery of 97;
    marriage founded on 136 _et seq._

  Concealment, evils of 178 _et seq._

  Curiosity, 101, 109 _et seq._


  D

  Dangerous Age, the 29 _et seq._

  Doctors and Patients’ secrets 157 _et seq._

  Dogs, 59, 60.


  E

  Economics, mania for, 158 _et seq._

  Education, sex 87 _et seq._


  F

  Father, daughter’s feeling for 54;
    the intruder 55 _et seq._, 95;
    after birth of child 56;
    conflict with son 56;
    authority of, necessary 57;
    effect on child 91 _et seq._ 93;
    danger of being too fond of child 104.

  Faults of children 43 _et seq._, 73 _et seq._ 99.

  Freedom for children 80 _et seq._


  G

  Gentleman, the temporary 165 _et seq._

  Girls, and seduction of boys 113, 118;
    playing with love 127 _et seq._
    _See also_ Child.

  Garrell, Vera M. (on “Youth and Marriage”) 175.


  H

  Husband, the old-fashioned 161 _et seq._


  J

  Jealousy, 44, 55, 68, 93, 95, 103, 109, 136.


  L

  Law, reform in relation to   parentage 35 _et seq._;
    reform in relation to adoption 61 _et seq._;
    of adoption in other countries 67 _et seq._;
    in relation to mothers’ pensions 71;
    in relation to seduction 113 _et seq._;
    in relation to age of consent 117 _et seq._;
    White Slave Traffic 118 _et. seq._;
    marriage law in other countries 170.

  Lyttelton, Dr. (on sex instruction) 107.


  M

  Marriage, joy in 33; 133 _et seq._
    result of children 136 _et seq._;
    causes of failure in 139;
    altered views on 141 _et seq._;
    unfaithfulness of men in 145 _et seq._;
    of women 149 _et seq._;
    too easy 169 _et seq._;
    problem of unions outside 174 _et seq._
    _See also_ Birth Control.

  Michaelis, Karin 29 _et. seq._

  Mother, and child who steals 43 _et seq._;
    danger of being too fond of child 52 _et. seq._ 104;
    supreme with child 55, 72, 92;
    perfect and (childless) 59;
    difficulty of adoptions for 61 _et seq._;
    love, effect on child 91;
    and sex instruction 108 _et seq._;
    after birth of child 145 _et seq._;
    image of, sought in wife 161.


  N

  Neil, Judge 71 _et seq._


  O

  Old-fashioned husband 161 _et seq._


  P

  Pensions for mothers 71 _et seq._

  Play 81;
    love in 127 _et seq._

  Pleasure, search for 31, 133.

  Punishment of children 73 _et seq._, 84 _et seq._

  Parent, _See_ Father and Mother.


  R

  Racial types, best seen in women 20.

  Rebellion of children, necessary 51 _et seq._; 82; 94.

  Remorse, as temptation 46;
    not necessarily good 98.


  S

  Schools, poor law 72;
    for delinquent 77;
    modern and their errors 79 _et seq._

  Sex, education 87 _et seq._;
    early manifestation of 88;
    right age for 107 _et seq._

  Solitary confinement condemned 77.

  Son, who steals 43 _et seq._
    _See also_ Child.

  Spain 19 _et seq._;
    dancing in 21;
    workers (women) in 23 _et seq._


  W

  Wife, the modern 161 _et seq._

  Wife, the young 163 _et seq._

  Women, their qualities compared with those of cats 16 _et seq._;
    in Spain 19 _et seq._;
    racial types best seen in 20;
    as workers in Spain 23 _et seq._;
    approaching age, in terror of 30;
    search for pleasure in 31;
    false purity in 32;
    repression in 33;
    legal position of 35;
    childless 59;
    difficulties in adopting children by _et seq._ 61;
    seduction of men by 113 _et seq._, 118, 123;
    myth of superior purity 113 _et seq._;
    child more than husband to 145 _et seq._;
    attitude to sexual disease of 158 _et seq._

  Women, _See also_ Birth Control, Marriages, Mother, Wife, the modern,
    Gentleman, the temporary.


  _Clements Bros., Printers, Meeting House Lane, Chatham_





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Women, Children, Love, and Marriage, by 
Catherine Gasquoine Hartley

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WOMEN, CHILDREN, LOVE, MARRIAGE ***

***** This file should be named 63898-0.txt or 63898-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/3/8/9/63898/

Produced by Turgut Dincer and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg EBook of Dread-Flame of M'Tonak, by Henry Hasse

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Dread-Flame of M'Tonak

Author: Henry Hasse

Release Date: November 27, 2020 [EBook #63897]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DREAD-FLAME OF M'TONAK ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                        DREAD-FLAME OF M'TONAK

                            By HENRY HASSE

           A flame of pure thought ... green and unspeakably
           vile ... thrust from its own supra-dimension into
             the Solar warp, it found one whose malignance
            matched its own--and who would bargain with it.
               Against them--Ketrik, outlawed and alone!

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                       Planet Stories Fall 1946.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


Ketrik came in from Perlac, came fast, using the Frequency Tuner all
the way. Now his great bulk came forward in the control-seat, his eyes
fastened intently on the dark blue disk of Earth that loomed ahead.

"Strange," he muttered. "Strange, no Patrollers! I expected an escort
at least, if not a challenge!"

But no one heard. Ketrik, as always, had come alone. The helio from
Mark Travers, recorded on the sensitized receivers at Perlac, had
been more than a summons and a plea; it had contained an undertone
of urgency. Ketrik had left at once, making the trip from the newly
discovered outer planet in record time, thanks to the secret power-unit
which the Earth Council still coveted.

Ketrik thought of that now, as he neared Earth where he had not set
foot for so long. He remembered the tedious negotiations between
Earth and Perlac, designed to bring the latter planet into the Solar
Federation--a status hardly equitable to the Perlac government, due
to Earth's high-handed demands. For Earth still claimed priority on
Brownell's "Frequency Tuner," despite the fact that he had been forced
to flee with his invention to Perlac; and since then there had been an
alarming exodus of Earth's scientists to Perlac where they could work
out their ideas unhampered.[1]

[Footnote 1: _Passage to Planet X_, Planet Stories, Winter, 1945.]

The Earth Council remained haughty, adamant. Only six months ago there
had been a skirmish beyond Jupiter in which several Earth Patrollers
had gone to flaming destruction against the speedy Perlac ships. The
"Perlac Incident" was developing into open, bitter warfare. Venus
remained wisely aloof, riding a crest of peace under the reign of
Princess Aladdian. And on Mars, Dar Vaajo sat brooding on his ancient
throne, silent and watchful.

"Maybe I'm being a fool," Ketrik murmured now as he crossed the orbit
of Earth's moon. "Mark Travers guaranteed me safe landing and full
protection--nevertheless--"

Weary but still cautious, he switched to the auxiliary rocket-power,
then went to work dismantling the Frequency Tuner. In a short time
he had jumbled the unit into a confusion of its component parts, and
carefully hid it away. He trusted Mark Travers ... but there were
others.

As he picked up the grav-beam for his landing, he thought again of
Mark. It would be good to see him again after four years. He wondered
if the lad's status as "Member of Council" had changed him any. Even
more, he wondered at Mark's urgent message.

The city spread below. Then the landing field. Ketrik berthed with
practiced ease, stepped down from the lock.

       *       *       *       *       *

The guards closed in fast. There were dozens of them. Ketrik had only
time to glimpse the black-and-silver insignia of the elite Council
Guard, the drawn guns and grim purpose on their faces. Even as he
whirled back toward his ship, the deadly song of a heat-beam sounded
past his ear--so close he could feel the swirling scorch of it.

Ketrik came erect and motionless. He turned slowly, brain wry with the
thought that he'd come into a trap after all. But he smiled--a twisted
smile which failed to erase the hard lines of his face. His eyes were
a puzzle, gray and serene but somehow mocking beneath the dark bangs
tumbling across his forehead.

The Guards formed a watchful circle about this man whose deeds were
renowned throughout the System. For a moment their Captain hesitated.
Then, squaring his shoulders, he stepped forward. His gun became
intimate with Ketrik's wishbone.

"George Ketrik, I arrest you by order of the Supreme Earth Council! You
will come along peaceably or suffer the consequences!" The man's voice
was overly loud, arrogant. With a dramatic gesture he removed Ketrik's
gun, then whirled him into the hands of the Guards. They marched toward
a waiting tube-car. Other guards were trying to keep back the crowd,
passengers for the Venus Express who thronged the field.

Ketrik's eyes were emotionless now, devoid of color. He said
tonelessly: "Taking quite a chance, aren't you, Captain? I've only
counted fifty of your men."

"We've heard too much about you, Ketrik! And we want you alive--that's
why we didn't try to take you in space. I'm glad you're being sensible
about this."

Ketrik shrugged his towering shoulders as though to say, "Why not?"
But his mind raced. So they wanted him alive. They were nearing the
tube-car now, and the crowd, eternally curious, was trying to press in.

It was now or never. Ketrik stumbled. His elbow shot back, caught the
captain in the stomach. With the same motion he snatched the latter's
heat-gun, and bending low, lunged to the left. The crowd parted before
his onrush. Women screamed at sight of the gun he waved before him.

Ketrik heard shouts and curses from the startled guard, but he knew
they wouldn't fire into the crowd. A uniformed man loomed before him,
swinging a gun-fist up. Ketrik was quicker. The guard went down from
a sledge-hammer blow. Grinning joyously, Ketrik evaded two others. He
twisted and turned through the crowd, with some notion of gaining the
tube-car and escaping into the heart of the city.

And it might have worked. Now a path was opening clear. But this time
he really stumbled, lost his balance momentarily. It was enough to
allow the guards to close in. Ketrik twisted erect, felt clutching
hands upon him and heard the bellowing voice of the captain. He swung
out with his arms, felt men flung backward. He tried to bring up the
heat-gun.

This time someone else was quicker.

A heavy weight crashed against Ketrik's head, a sun exploded into
millions of fragments which dwindled away as he plunged forward into
darkness.

       *       *       *       *       *

He regained his faculties quickly. His subconsciousness demanded it.
This curious "awareness" in which Ketrik had trained himself had saved
him from many a tight scrape.

But now he did not open his eyes at once. He knew he was in the
tube-car, for he could feel the cushioned seat beneath him and the
faint vibration of the gyro-motors. Then he became aware of another
fact.

He was alone.

This brought him to his feet, wide-eyed and alert. He felt the weight
of his own gun again in his belt, examined it, found it still loaded.
Strange!

Where were the guards? Why should they be sending him somewhere alone?
A glance at the _crystyte_ window revealed a flashing panorama of the
city. He knew he was moving at terrific speed, probably on a special
"right-of-way." To attempt an escape now would be suicide.

He shrugged, settled down in the seat. His capture had been well
planned, but he failed to see what the Council hoped to gain by it!
Ketrik felt a surge of cold fury at this treachery--a treachery in
which Mark Travers must have had a hand.

Presently a braking signal flashed green. The tiny car sighed, as
though exhausted from its headlong route across the city. It came to a
stop against the forward cushion of air, and doors of _duraplon_ slid
smoothly back.

Hand near his gun, Ketrik emerged into a long empty corridor of black
and silver. Black marble walls reached sheerly up, to curve away
into a filigreed ceiling. Priceless tapestries adorned the walls,
caught a hidden overhead glow and shattered it into lances of silver
radiance. Ketrik frowned, looking at these tapestries. Their design
was interwoven with thousands of _Kra_ plumes, those priceless silvery
plumes for which he'd risked his life many times among the wild peaks
of Ganymede. Only the very elect could afford them. He knew now, that
he must be in Earth's Council Chambers.

Again he felt a tingling awareness, knew that unseen eyes were upon
him. He straightened his shoulders and walked unhurriedly toward a
massive door at the end of the corridor. As he neared it, there came a
tiny click and the door slid back.

It was a large room but startlingly bare. A huge table of Martian
_majagua_ wood, with a dozen surrounding chairs, occupied the center.
The only other article was a magnificent Ethero-Magnum, with screen
reaching nearly to the ceiling--an instrument powerful enough for
communication with Venus, Mars, even the Callistan colonies.

To Ketrik's surprise, only one Member of Council was present. This man
had risen as Ketrik entered. Ketrik stared and it took him fully a
minute to recognize this man. It had been four years since he had last
seen him, out there at Perlac--but now Mark Travers seemed to have aged
twenty years!

Mark came slowly around the table, hand thrust out in greeting.

Ketrik's voice was like a whiplash.

"Nice going, Travers! I trusted you, so I came right into your little
trap! What is it you want--the Frequency Tuner? Or am I just plain
under arrest?"

Mark stopped in his tracks. A pained look swept across his features.
Ketrik went on mercilessly.

"And I expected a better reception than this! Where's the rest of the
Council? I'll save you time, though, and tell you that Perlac has
ceased negotiating. We're prepared to fight for our independence and
free enterprise in the System!"

"I know that, Ketrik. I'll continue to champion Perlac's cause against
all odds here!" Grim-faced, Mark began pacing the room. "As for the
other eleven Council Members--they don't even know that you've arrived
on Earth. I'm risking my position in Council, perhaps my very life, by
bringing an outsider into these chambers without a quorum present!"

Ketrik's mien underwent a change. "You mean I'm not under arrest?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Mark laughed. "Of course you're not! That little show at the spaceport
was faked, had to be. And," he smiled a little, "thanks for adding the
touch of realism. Moreover, your spacer is in safe hands."

"Well, son, congratulations!" Ketrik grinned broadly. "You sure had me
fooled. But what about the rest of the Council, if they learn that I'm
on Earth--"

"By the time they do, it won't matter. You won't be here." Mark stopped
his pacing, turned to the famed adventurer. "Ketrik, I sent for you
because I need you desperately! Earth needs you! I have reason to
believe that Earth is facing the greatest danger in its history."

"Earth." The bronzed exile spoke the word quietly, but with a world of
contempt.

"Well, then, the entire System! Even Perlac. I believe it will strike
first at Earth, in fact may already have done so."

"And this danger. Danger from what?"

"Ketrik, you'll probably think me a fool--but I don't know! It's so
damned vague it's terrifying. I do have an accumulation of data that
points to Mars. I want you to go there."

"Mars? A second-rate power. Their race is dying out, and their science
goes with it."

Mark shook his head. "Don't underrate Dar Vaajo! He's an old man
now, but cunning. An opportunist. He's never forgotten how Princess
Aladdian of Venus, through her treaty with Earth, put an end to his
dreams of conquest."[2]

[Footnote 2: _Alcatraz of the Starways_, Planet Stories, May, 1943.]

"Yes, I remember it well." Ketrik was thoughtful. "But how could Dar
Vaajo make a play now against the power of Earth, or for that matter
Perlac?"

Mark permitted himself a smile. He didn't miss the implication that
Perlac, too, was fast becoming a power to be reckoned with.

"I'll give you the facts," he said quietly, "and you can judge. About
two years ago, Dar Vaajo stopped all Uranium shipments from Mars. That
in itself is comparatively unimportant. What is important, is the Earth
Council. Now consider, Ketrik--I've been close to these men for four
years. Very often it has seemed to me that where rudimentary logic
should dictate a course of action, they incomprehensibly choose to
follow another. So it was with this Uranium embargo. They might easily
have forced a showdown, but instead, they seemed satisfied with Dar
Vaajo's peculiar evasions.

"Of course, about this time Earth's quarrel with Perlac was reaching
a crisis. But even there, I noticed definite trends of irrational
thinking on the part of the Members. At our frequent sessions to
discuss the Perlac question, they seemed to appreciate all the factors
involved--even that we were fast losing our best scientific talent to
Perlac. Yet their damned egotisms crept through, dictating to their
reason. Ketrik, I swear to you that when they voted sending a fleet
of Patrollers out to Jupiter to prevent your men from landing there,
I did everything in my power to prevent it. But again my voice was
one against eleven. And believe me, the majority vote of Council is
final--irrevocable."

"I have reason to know that," Ketrik said. "But, Mark, I still fail to
see this danger you spoke of."

"I'm getting to it. And this is the part that's frightening. About a
month ago, in my own home, I set up a secret Cerebro-Scanner. Know what
that is?"

"Never heard of it."

"It's new, and plenty dangerous in the wrong hands. Works on a ray
principle. Produces elaborate graphs of an individual's mental and
emotional co-ordinates. Well, on a secret wave-length I probed the
minds of my fellow Council Members!" Mark smiled. "Yes, I'd probably
receive sentence of death if they knew, but the end justified the
means. Ketrik, the resulting graphs reveal that the cerebro-thalamic
co-ordinates of the Council Members do not vary in the slightest! They
are the same down to ten decimal points!"

Ketrik gestured helplessly. "Is this important?"

Mark stared at him. "Important--it's unprecedented! Much the same as
finding eleven identical sets of fingerprints! But what is worse, the
graphs show elements of--of--it's hard to explain. Certainly not
disloyalty! Rather the opposite. An _intense_ loyalty, but governed by
unreason. Their minds seem directed along a single channel, toward a
definite end. And that is--the utter humbling of Perlac! Nothing else
seems to matter!"

Ketrik nodded. Then he asked the obvious question.

"Did you employ this Scanner on yourself?"

"To make the record complete--yes! Needless to say, this tenacity
of purpose concerning Perlac is utterly missing from my own mental
co-ordinates."

"Hmm. How do you account for that?"

"I can't. But this mental trend in the others seems to be _induced_.
Now, you begin to see the implications?"

Ketrik nodded slowly. "Yes, son, and you're right! It even begins to
scare me a little. Suppose Dar Vaajo in some way has gained control of
those eleven minds--is that what you mean? But why Dar Vaajo?"

"There's one more item that completes the pattern, and points to Mars.
During the past year, as many as four of our spacers have disappeared
on the Earth-Mars route. No trace has ever been found. However, about a
month ago, a life-boat from the missing _Terra III_ was found drifting
near the orbit of our moon. Aboard was one survivor--Dr. Curt Ransome,
the brilliant physicist and mathematician, returning from a lecture
tour on Mars."

"And could you learn nothing from him?"

"No." Mark's voice was tragic. "We learned nothing, because--_his
brilliant mind was gone_! The doctors say it's doubtful if he'll
ever respond to treatment. He babbles incessantly, has the mind of a
week-old infant!"

Ketrik was aghast. "What has the Council done?"

"Nothing, of course!" Mark laughed bitterly. "They're pre-occupied
with Perlac! I've personally contacted Dar Vaajo on the Ethero-Magnum.
He expresses regret and puzzlement, offers every aid in tracing the
disappearing ships. But there's an under-current of evasion. As a
desperate measure I sent two secret operatives to Mars."

"Good," Ketrik nodded his approval. "They get through all right?"

"Yes, apparently just in time. Dar Vaajo has thrown a close guard about
the planet. Anyway, my operatives managed to set up a communications
base in the wilds of the K'Mari Range, half a day's flight from
Turibek, capital of South Mars. I've contacted them twice. They report
strange activities at Turibek, something in the nature of a vast
scientific experiment! And another thing. Dar Vaajo apparently has made
a truce with the Rajecs."

"The Rajecs! Those Martian Outlanders?" Ketrik's face was dark with
real concern. This news seemed to affect him more than anything Mark
had said.

"We've really never learned much about those strange desert tribes,"
Mark went on. "But--"

"It's impossible!" Ketrik said. "Those Outlanders hate the Upper
Martians with a hatred beyond our understanding. Nothing would impel
them to make truce, absolutely _nothing_! I know, for I once lived
among them for six months." Ketrik was as near to being excited as was
possible for him. "Yes, Mark, I'll go to Mars. This really begins to
interest me!"


                                  II

They spent much of that night in going over their plans. Ketrik had
no misapprehensions about landing on Mars; he could do that despite
Vaajo's patrols. Turibek presented the real problem.

Carefully he perused the tele-strip recordings from Mark's operatives,
E-39 and EV-5. There had only been two reports, and they were brief.

"This last one was sent two weeks ago," Mark said, "and I haven't been
able to contact them since. The channel's dead. I'm afraid it means
their hide-out was discovered!"

Ketrik studied the rough map Mark had made, showing the location of the
hide-out in the K'Mari Range, and its position from Turibek.

"This will help. I'll try to get over there, see if anything's left of
their sending equipment. Then I want to make a try for the city. If
I can get inside of Turibek, and maybe get a line on this scientific
thing they're working up ... I was at Turibek eight years ago, and know
it fairly well."

"Here's a photo-static air view," Mark said. "Afraid it doesn't show
much."

"It shows one thing," Ketrik said, studying the film. "Dar Vaajo's had
a wall built completely around the city. That wasn't there eight years
ago! And those towers stationed around the wall--what do you suppose
they are?"

"Control towers. That's an electronic wall! And you'll observe there's
another within the city itself, surrounding that group of buildings
which must be the laboratories. Ketrik--if you ever get in there...."
His voice dwindled away in doubt.

"You don't think I can do it? I don't either, Mark--not as an Earthman!"

"Come. We'll fix that."

They passed through endless corridors, arrived finally at a large
white-enameled room. It was complete with operating tables,
instruments, plastics, ray-lamps--everything necessary to Earth's
espionage system.

Ketrik stripped piecemeal, allowed every inch of his superbly muscled
body to be subjected to the stinging Ulmo lamps. Gradually under
the hot rays, the very pigmentation of his skin changed to the deep
reddish-copper of a Martian. Mark proved himself an expert at this.
Even the insides of Ketrik's ears did not escape the ray.

"Don't worry," Mark told him. "This will all wear off eventually."

"Yes? How long?"

"In about two years! Now, your eyes. You never saw a Martian with gray
eyes. Look up just a moment."

A few drops of liquid, a harmless vegetable composition, changed
Ketrik's eyes to a muddy golden color.

"Those bangs have got to come off!" Mark went to work in earnest. Ten
minutes under another ray, and Ketrik's unruly hair was transformed
into tight, crisp curls in keeping with the Martian fashion. His
features presented the hardest problem, but Mark worked miracles with
the plastics and equipment.

At last the job was done. When Ketrik surveyed himself in the mirror
he saw a tall, somewhat arrogant Martian of the middle class, with
slightly flaring nostrils, bulging cheek-bones and lips curving in a
thin, cruel smile. He nodded, more than satisfied.

Mark consulted his wrist-chrono. "Four hours until dawn. Better grab a
few hours' sleep, it may be your last for a while."

"Sure, but I'll rest better if I know one thing. Where's my ship?"

"My guards moved it secretly to the underground repair locks. Right
now it's undergoing as radical a change as I just performed on you."
Mark smiled. "When you leave Earth, it will be in a slow-powered ore
freighter ostensibly bound for the Moon!"

       *       *       *       *       *

An hour before the dawn, Mark wakened Ketrik. But Mark hadn't been idle
in those hours. He handed the other a small, compact instrument.

"Here's a Scanner disc I just finished assembling. It only works within
a very short range, but you may have need of it."

They took the swift tube-car across the city and arrived at the
spaceport amidst surprising activity. A Callistan freighter had just
berthed. Bright lights were trained upon it, men and trucks were moving
about handling the cargo.

"I planned it for this hour," Mark explained, "because now less
attention will be drawn to you. We can't be too careful." He pointed to
a dark, far corner of the field where a clumsy bulk rested. "Believe it
or not, that's your ship. The exterior's been changed but that's all.
You still have the Frequency Tuner." They paused for a moment in solemn
thought. "I can't impress upon you too much, Ketrik, what this--"

"That's right, Mark, you can't. So let's not mention it." Ketrik was
brusque. "Believe me, son, I know what I'm up against."

"Send _any_ news at all as to what Dar Vaajo's up to. If I learn
that, I can rouse the people of Earth to preparedness in spite of the
Council." He thrust out his hand. "I'll say goodby now--and good luck!"

Ketrik said simply, "You'll be hearing from me, Mark." He moved across
the field, keeping to the shadows, the collar of his space tunic turned
up. He wondered how many of the men working about this field were
Martian "Specials." Some of them, surely. If he, an Earthman, could be
molded into Martian guise, Dar Vaajo could certainly perform the same
miracle in reverse and probably had.

He reached his ship undetected. All was dark and quiet. The hull, he
noticed, had been painted solid black. He entered and flicked on the
lights. Mark was right, nothing on the inside had been changed.

He explored the ship to make sure. Then he moved forward to the
control-console, remembering that this was supposed to be a clumsy Moon
freighter. The rockets roared. The ship moved with slow acceleration up
the step locks, to finally catapult into the stratosphere.

And five minutes later, just as he was clearing Earth's gravity, he
heard the voice behind him:

"Well, Ketrik, at last! Really--I thought you were never going to make
it!"

Ketrik had long since learned caution in these matters. He turned
slowly now and was glad he did. The first thing he saw was the gun--a
powerful weapon, an electro. The fist wrapped around it looked firm and
experienced. Ketrik's gaze went to the man's face.

It was the Captain of the Guard, the same captain who had met him at
his landing eight hours before. The man was cold-eyed now. He kept a
few paces away from Ketrik.

Ketrik said, "I searched the ship. Where were you?"

"You failed to look in the emergency fuel locker. It was a tight
squeeze for me." He smiled tightly, surveying Ketrik's transformed
figure. "A nice job. Slightly tall for a Martian but, withal very nice.
Too bad all that ingenuity has to be wasted at the very outset."

Ketrik's muscles tightened. As though it were a signal, the other's
voice became brittle.

"Up! Up with those hands, Ketrik. I have a few questions to ask, and
then--"

       *       *       *       *       *

It seemed ridiculously easy, the way Ketrik did it. He let his eyes
go dull. He sighed and raised his hands, slowly. He saw the other's
gun-fist relax ever so slightly. Then Ketrik's legs gave way and he
went swiftly downward. The captain fired but Ketrik wasn't there, his
powerful muscles had launched him forward, beneath the hissing beam.
His shoulder caught the other just below the midriff and bent him
double, carried him backward. They crashed into the controlroom door.
Ketrik's left hand found the other's gun-wrist and twisted powerfully.
A bone snapped, the electro skidded away. The captain began a curse but
it was cut short by Ketrik's right hand at his throat.

Ketrik pulled the man to a sitting posture. He gazed deep into the eyes
which were glazing over with pain. But it was not enough to prevent the
true color from shining through ... the color of dull, tarnished gold.

"I thought so," Ketrik murmured, and then his hand loosened, balled
into a fist that drove forward. The man laid back and went limp.

Ketrik's fingers probed the other's face. The man was a Martian, all
right, the features had been subtly altered. Enough to fool even Mark!
Captain of the elite guard! How long had the man masqueraded in that
position, Ketrik wondered--and then he shrugged. It didn't matter now.

He went through the man's clothes, found nothing of interest until he
came under the left arm-pit. There, next to the skin, he found a tiny
metal disk. He rose, went over to the wall-light to examine his find.
The disk was perforated with queer Martian characters. Ketrik knew
Martian, but he couldn't quite make these out. He bent closer.

A sixth sense warned him, or perhaps it was some slight sound. He
whirled. The Martian's hand had moved, was now grasping the electro
which he swung up into line. Ketrik's hand dropped and he fired his own
heat-beam from the hip. The beam cut a clean swath across the other's
chest, and he died without so much as a sigh.

"Sorry, buddy, whoever you are," Ketrik whispered. "Guess I'd have had
to do that anyway, though. When Dar Vaajo plants Specials like you on
Earth, we don't play for fun!"

He fastened the identification disk under his own arm-pit. Five minutes
later, from the starboard lock, he dumped the body into space and
without a qualm, rayed it to dust.

Then, champing with impatience, Ketrik allowed his "freighter" to plod
Moonward. He skirted within five thousand miles of it, then with the
satellite as a shield between him and Earth, he charted for Mars.

His brush with the Martian operative had sobered him. He began to
realize that Mark had every reason for alarm! The subtle tampering with
the Council's mental patterns, the placing of operatives in high Earth
positions, the secret scientific experiments on Mars--they all had to
tie in. He was sure of one thing now. Dar Vaajo, an embittered old man,
was making one last bid which would bring his race to its former glory
or else carry it forever to extinction with him.

There were surely other Martian operatives on Earth, and they
would have established a communications base. By this time they had
undoubtedly flashed the news of his coming. Ketrik smiled inwardly.
Very well--they'd be expecting him at Turibek, but he'd take the
indirect approach.

All the way to Mars his mind was at work. He was remembering days he'd
spent in that wild desert country of South Mars. From the tide of his
thoughts he segregated events ... places and people ... the canals and
cruel deserts, the customs of the Rajecs, those fierce black outcasts
from the cities of Mars. He knew that before he got through to Turibek,
he'd need all this. Already a plan was forming....

Twenty hours later he sighted a Mars patrol, six formidable spacers
athwart the Earth-route. They moved leisurely, in perfect formation,
and Ketrik knew their network of "finder beams" covered a large area.
However, the power-principle of the Frequency Tuner defied those
"finders." No challenge came through his open radio, which meant they
hadn't sighted him yet.

A solid black ship was strictly against the Space Code, but Codes
mattered little now! With the ebony backdrop of space behind him,
Ketrik's ship would be hard to detect. He decided to try a sneak past
them. He'd have to go into Inferior-plane, but he was sure he could
make it.

Quickly he changed course, swept into a sharp parabola that carried
him far below the Ecliptic. In a matter of minutes he was watching the
Mars-cruisers fade away into darkness. His present course would bring
him far over into Mars' dark-side, but that was what he wanted anyway.

       *       *       *       *       *

Hours later the vast South Desert was rising up below him. Deimos had
just appeared, climbing with slow majesty across the sky; Phobos would
come a few hours later, pursuing its reckless course. Ketrik peered far
ahead to the horizon. There, against the dark downward curve, he saw a
faint glow that was not the glow of Deimos. He knew that must be the
capital city, Turibek, untold miles away. He made swift calculation. To
the right, then, would be the K'Mari Range. He knew those mountains.
It would be the very place to leave his ship.

He dropped lower and headed for there. The pale ghost-glow of Deimos
didn't help much. He switched to infra-red, peered at the V-Panel as it
lighted up and saw the unmistakable, serrated line of mountains about
twenty miles away. He had judged it that close! Ketrik grinned proudly.

It was short-lived. A Martian voice sliced through the radio, shrill
and commanding.

"Ground! You, below there--you will ground immediately or we blast!"

Then Ketrik realized that for the past several minutes there had been
a faint humming sound from above and all about him, scarcely heard. He
had relaxed in his vigilance, and the Martian 'copters had picked out
his trail--those fast-powered and deadly scouting ships. They too must
be equipped with infra-red!

Even as these thoughts raced through his mind, Ketrik was acting. He
leaped away from the V-Panel, grabbed the Control and threw it over.
Too late now! The ship responded, but sluggishly. The nose veered
sharply upward, trying to leap away--then the entire hull shuddered.
Power-beams! It must be a vast concentration of them, to stop Frequency
power! Slowly his forward progress was retarded. Relentlessly he was
being forced down into the Martian sands. Again the voice sliced
through.

"It is useless, outlaw! We've had you in our finder for the past five
minutes and you are in a network of Power-beams. Nullify your control
immediately or we blast!"

Ketrik cursed. Already his ship was straining at the seams. And now
he felt insufferable heat all about him, realized they were using the
beams. His stomach turned over as he thought of his rocket-tubes loaded
with fuel....

Quickly he entered the starboard lock; stood peering down. He was
dropping fast. Above him now he saw hosts of vague shapes, heard the
whine of Martian 'copter blades cutting the air. The metal under his
fingers was growing hot. He counted to five, slowly ... and leaped
outward.

It may have been thirty feet--or fifty. Ketrik only knew that he was
plummeting downward. He let his muscles go limp, and just in time. He
hit the sand hard, rolled over once and knew that no bones were broken.
Above him he saw the pale glow of heat-beams, saw the hull of his
spacer growing cherry-red ... and suddenly realized his danger.

He staggered up, went ploughing across the desert, still mentally
counting off the seconds ... "eight ... nine ... ten...." The explosion
lighted the sky for a hell-filled moment. Ketrik went hurling forward,
to land head foremost into the sand. Parts of his ship came thudding
down about him.

One fragment, red-hot, landed against his arm and burned it severely.
Other fragments scattered over a wide area. Ketrik was cursing now,
unconsciously using the mono-syllabic Martian in which he had versed
himself.

Then it was all over. Ketrik was glad of only one thing. His ship was
gone, but the Frequency Tuner had gone with it! The Martians would
never get that priceless power unit. He rolled to his back and looked
up.

It was not over! A few 'copters were descending to view the
wreckage--or perhaps to look for him. Had they seen him jump? Powerful
searchlights began criss-crossing the area. Again he staggered up, went
forward into darkness. Every muscle ached, but his eyes were alert for
the beams. Whenever one passed near him, he flattened into the sand.
After untold agonies, he judged that he was fairly safe. Far behind, he
heard the drift of excited Martian voices.

He didn't rest. He kept going away from those voices. They might still
be looking for him. He was utterly confused in his direction now. He
could be going toward Turibek, or toward K'Mari Range ... or out into
the vast wilderness to the south. One of those dark storms was sweeping
up, and Deimos was hidden. Soon the sharp sand began to pelt him.

Ketrik turned up his collar and ploughed on. He remembered that those
storms usually, but not always, came up from the south. He guided his
direction by that, and plunged on.

"At least one thing's settled," he muttered after a while. "I'm
relieved of the problem of hiding my ship!"


                                  III

Through adventures on every far-flung world, every barren satellite,
Ketrik's uncanny "time-awareness" had never failed him. It didn't now.
He knew that it was precisely one hour and twenty minutes later when
he saw the flickering lights, so he couldn't have come far. He saw the
lights but once, quite a distance ahead and low against the ground.
Then they were gone as the sand rose in renewed fury.

He moved cautiously now. He didn't see the lights again but knew he was
going toward them. Ketrik was no stranger to this south desert. Now
the old nameless awareness was with him. It may not have been anything
he heard--but he suddenly knew that very close, just beyond the radius
of his vision, unknown shapes moved through murky darkness. The very
sands seemed to whisper the danger. But Ketrik heard other sounds now.
The sounds he heard were sibilant footsteps and they were patient, very
patient, as they kept pace with him.

He became suddenly motionless, held his ears attuned. The soft
footsteps stopped, but not before Ketrik determined that they were on
both sides of him now and probably behind him as well. He nodded grimly
and went on, no longer trying to tread softly. He loosened the electro
in his belt. These might be Rajecs or they might be the scavenger rats
that trailed a man until he dropped. In either event....

He knew very soon. They came hurtling out of darkness at him, great
black shapes, silent and swift. But they were man-size, which meant
they were Rajecs. His electro was out, but he didn't get a chance to
use it. A muscular hand seized his arm and bore it painfully backward.
Other Rajecs crowded in. Even at this close range Ketrik could see
little except their eyes, feral as flaming topaz.

Even Ketrik could not fight that which he could not see. But he tried,
tried grimly until the weight of their bodies bore him down. He
remembered that these people could see in darkness. They undoubtedly
saw that he was "Martian," and his life would be forfeit unless....

He was trying to remember something else, something out of Rajec
legendry. A single word. It came to him then, and he ceased fighting.
He whispered the word fiercely.

"_S'Relah!_"

It was magic. The clutching hands loosened. He could feel the black
muscular figures draw back, hesitant.

"You are Martian!" one of them hissed.

"But _S'Relah_, I tell you!" Ketrik spat the word. "I am one of you!"

They helped him to rise, but kept firm grip on his arms. "We will see.
Come."

They went forward through darkness. Presently they were mounting a
slight rise. From the top of it Ketrik looked down at the campfires of
a Rajec caravan, a large one.

As they moved down the slope, Ketrik realized he'd have to stick to
his word. His mind raced, building up a brief but, he hoped, suitable
story. He was sufficiently versed in Martian history. He knew that
aeons ago vast tribes of these black-skinned Rajecs had been dominant
on the planet. But the "Upper Martians," so called, had progressed
phenomenally. They were superior in the arts, social government,
science, and the "culture" of warfare. They had swept down from the
north, expanding, building their cities and developing their waterways,
the now famous Canals. A bitter thousand-years' war had driven the
Rajecs ever southward into the merciless deserts.

There they had stayed, waging periodic but futile warfare. Wild
and tribal now, they still had never forgotten. The _S'Relah_ was
a fanatic, inter-tribal society ... persisting through countless
generations, dedicated to a relentless hate of those upper Martians.
And Ketrik knew what few men knew--that among the _S'Relah_ were many
renegade Martians, outlaws and embittered "politicals" usually, working
through the Society for personal gain or revenge.

       *       *       *       *       *

Ketrik had his story ready as they came into the camp. The Rajec leader
was sent for. This man was large, well proportioned, the muscles
beneath his ebon skin high-lighted in the glow of the central fire. He
was armed merely with a razor-edged dagger in a jewelled belt. Ketrik,
looking at him, felt respect and a certain foreboding--the latter
occasioned by the slight enigmatic smile about the other's lips.

The man eyed Ketrik with equal interest. His keen gaze lingered overly
long on his "Martian" features. He certainly noted the electro which
Ketrik retained, but it didn't seem to bother him. He spoke at last, in
Martian.

"You claim to be _S'Relah_. We will need proof of that. What is your
name?"

"Khosan."

"Ah, yes. Khosan. And where do you come from?"

"L'Ottli." Ketrik named a small mining camp far to the south. "Been
prospecting there for six months, trying to make stake enough to get up
to Turibek."

"Yes. We, too, go to Turibek. You knew that?"

Ketrik allowed puzzlement to show in his eyes. The other went on. "You
seem surprised, Khosan. Had you not heard, then, that your emperor, Dar
Vaajo, has signed a treaty with the consolidated tribes of Rajec?"

"I had not heard. And I believe you lie! The Rajecs would never make
treaty!" Ketrik hoped his disbelief sounded convincing.

"It is true," the black shrugged. "But that does not matter. Your going
to Turibek matters. A foolhardy thing to attempt alone!" The enigmatic
smile still lingered. "But, then, being at L'Ottli for so long, you
were not aware of Dar Vaajo's scouts everywhere. This area has become
thick with their 'copters--especially in the last few hours!" There was
calculated meaning in the last words.

Ketrik decided on a bold stroke. He said calmly, "Yes. I am aware of it
now. They blasted my plane out of the sky scarcely an hour ago. Perhaps
you saw that?"

"We all have observed a slight display in the sky to the west. You
know--Khosan--word reaches us swiftly and in many ways. It is rumored
that Vaajo's scouts are seeking to apprehend one who _may_ come here
from Earth." The black paused, but Ketrik's eyes never flickered. "They
may even search this area. They know our camp is here. There should be
a reward of many Martian credits for capture of the one they seek!"

Ketrik shrugged. "That explains why they fired at me. I guess they
mistook me for that one."

The Rajec's smile vanished abruptly. His next questions came fast. "You
are _S'Relah_? Why are you _S'Relah_?"

"Political. Irreconcilable. My father was a 'political' before me."

"Where do you go in Turibek?"

"Where the Street of the Double Moon makes juncture with the Low Canal
is a tiny shop dealing in curios from the far planets. The proprietor
is one Jal Thurlo. I go there for a meeting with him."

"And the reason? The reason--quickly!"

Ketrik's gaze leveled and he said slowly, "You would not expect me to
tell you that. He too is a 'political'."

"You can quote the oath of the _S'Relah_?"

Ketrik had been waiting for that one. Now, in a low voice, he quoted
the oath which not all Rajecs, very few Martians, and probably no
Earthman save himself had ever heard. It was a strange and terrible
oath, an oath hallowed in blood, and its implications would have made
some men blanch. But Ketrik spoke it feelingly. He finished the words
and looked closely at the black's face.

The man was satisfied and strangely moved, albeit slightly puzzled. He
drew a tremulous breath at last.

"You have proven! You may go on to Turibek with us. We travel afoot and
the way is slow, but certain."

"That is agreeable."

       *       *       *       *       *

The leader drew Ketrik aside, out of hearing of the others. "At the
rear of our caravan is a small group of Martians, prospectors from the
nearby mountains--a ragged, harmless lot, whom we tolerate. I think it
advisable that you travel with them. Dar Vaajo's Specials are stationed
along our route."

Ketrik nodded curtly, started to move away. The Rajec stopped him.
"This mining camp you mention, this L'Ottli where you have been for
six months. Is it not far, far to the south, at the extreme end of the
K'Mari Range?"

"That's the place." Ketrik was on his guard.

"I thought you would like to know there is no L'Ottli. That entire town
was wiped out in a great avalanche three years ago. Oh, yes, one more
thing." The black was smiling now, looking at the place on Ketrik's arm
where the hot chunk of metal had burned the sleeve away. "That is a bad
burn, and a strange one--for a Martian."

Ketrik looked at his injured arm for the first time. Around the area
of the burn was a tiny outline of white--the white skin of an Earthman
showing through. Only the keen eyes of this Rajec would have noticed it.

"I'll give you other garments," the man said. "You had better burn
these. Good night, and sleep well--Khosan."

But Ketrik didn't sleep well. He burned his garments and donned the
others, then found the camp of the Martian prospectors. There were
six of them, all asleep now. Ketrik found a place by the fire and lay
awake, speculating.

The Rajec leader he trusted. The man was undoubtedly of the _S'Relah_.
But these six Martians would be suspicious of him, a newcomer. If
they hadn't yet heard of the search for a spy in the area, they would
certainly hear of it on the morrow! And they'd report him to any of Dar
Vaajo's "Specials" they met along the line of march.

That last thought gave Ketrik his answer, a temporary one at least.

At dawn the caravan moved. The six Martians were surprised at this
newcomer, but not yet suspicious. Ketrik didn't give them time to be.
From beneath his arm-pit he produced the thin disk which he'd taken
from the slain Martian operative. He flashed it briefly, asked a few
curt questions, and the men were properly cowed. Apparently they knew
the power of Vaajo's Specials.

"Just routine," Ketrik told them. "I'll travel along with you for a
while." Determined to play his role to the hilt, he added, "We can't be
too careful in these times. There may be _S'Relah_ among these damned
Rajecs, but we'll find them out before we get to Turibek. Dar Vaajo has
gone too far in his plans to have them thwarted now."

By tactful conversation he sought to learn something of what was going
on at Turibek. It soon became apparent that these bedraggled men didn't
know, and cared less. One of them had heard of Dar Vaajo coming to
Turibek with a complete staff of scientists, but that's as far as his
knowledge went. Another of the men had heard of the treaty, and wasn't
surprised.

"I've seen it coming," he said gruffly. "Many years I've lived in these
deserts, and I tell you the Rajecs aren't the same. Especially the last
few years. Something just seems to have gone out of them."

Something indeed had gone out of the Rajecs, if they made treaty!
Ketrik wondered what kind of magic Dar Vaajo had used to bring that
about. More particularly, _why_! There was some sort of link here,
between the Rajecs and whatever was going on at Turibek. And that, in
turn, was a pivot in Vaajo's larger plan, the plan that would deal with
Earth. Ketrik just couldn't piece it together as yet; he'd have to get
to Turibek. He thought fleetingly of those electronic walls....

The sun climbed higher, hot and dry, sapping the strength. Ketrik
marvelled at the long line of marching Rajecs--there were perhaps two
hundred. Long years in these deserts had inured them to discomfort.
Again he wondered why they were going to Turibek. Almost he was tempted
to go up and speak again with the Rajec leader--the man's name was
Aarnto, he learned--but he thought better of it.

At high noon they stopped for rations, and a few hours later the
Martian 'copters came over. They came from the direction of the city,
circled once, and flew leisurely back. Ketrik wondered what that meant.
He was soon to know.

       *       *       *       *       *

Presently Aarnto dropped back, fell into step beside him and drew him
away from the others. "You saw the 'copters?"

"Yes," Ketrik replied. "Trouble ahead?"

"For you, perhaps, O mysterious one from out of the desert! Those
'copters mean there is a surveying station ahead, and the Specials will
be there. Apparently they are still searching for the spy."

"These surveying stations--what do they do there?"

"Oh, they are diabolic, these Specials of Vaajo's! They have machines
which tear a man's mind apart, probe into his inner thoughts. No spy
could ever get past them."

"Then how do _you_ propose to get by, O grinning one?"

The black continued to grin. "True," he said frankly, "I am _S'Relah_.
And there are several others among us. We shall get by the Specials all
right, and into Turibek by the main gate. For the past year we have
prepared for this, through systematic thought-control. We can submerge
our true thoughts so that all the machines will read will be obeisance
and loyalty."

"Seems ticklish," Ketrik said. "But I guess I'll try that too." He had
no intention of trying it. He was watching Aarnto's reaction.

"Listen to me." Aarnto was serious, gripping Ketrik's arm. "You could
never manage it. It takes months to perfect such mind control, and you
have only hours. I do not know why you wish to get to Turibek, but you
quoted the oath to me. I know of another way into the city for you--it
will be perilous but not so perilous as trying to run the gauntlet of
Specials!"

"I am listening, O helpful one."

"We will reach this station before sundown. If you should leave the
caravan now, and cut across desert to the foothills, you would be safe.
Once over there...."

Now it was Ketrik who grinned. "I know. Once over there, I might find
the entrance to the ancient South Canal."

Aarnto was amazed. "You know of that too?"

"I've heard of it, but don't know the exact location."

Aarnto pointed to the K'Mari Range, indicating twin peaks that curled
up like devil's horns. "Guide your course directly between those. The
Canal ends somewhere in the foothills below."

"Thanks, Aarnto." Ketrik placed his hand on the man's shoulder, in the
Rajec custom. "May I repay you some day!"

"That day may come soon," the other said calmly. "I can almost promise
it."

Ketrik wondered what he meant by that, but wasted no more time on
words. Turning abruptly, he set out across the desert. The six Martians
watched him go. One of them, who had been silent and surly, frowned
thoughtfully now as he stared after Ketrik's retreating figure.

Ketrik judged the hills to be fifteen miles away at this point. He'd
be lucky if he reached them before nightfall. After that, well, there
were tales about those abandoned Canals....

He directed his course between the curving peaks. In a few hours the
ground began to rise slightly, became firmer underfoot. Still later,
deep little gullies began crossing the terrain. He followed these,
changing from one to the other, searching for some sign of the Canal.

After an interminable search, he was rewarded. He began to notice
peculiarities of the gully in which he trod. It seemed to level out,
and the walls seemed smoother and higher. He scraped away layers of
sand, saw ancient stone.

By this time the sun had dropped below his vision. He knew that any
minute the Martian night would come with awful suddenness. And with it,
would come ... other things.

But Ketrik was unprepared for what came in that moment. He heard a
sudden sharp _whirr_ of blades, and a 'copter appeared above him! It
swept so low he could almost see the pilot. There was no doubt the
pilot had seen him, for a heat-beam sliced downward, swept along the
Canal floor. Ketrik leaped aside, hugged the sandy wall.

Then the 'copter was gone, but Ketrik knew it would circle and return.
That could only mean one thing. The caravan had reached the Station,
and one of those Martians had spoken of him to the Specials.

Ahead, through the gloom, the Canal seemed to dip into a sort of
culvert. He raced for it as he heard the whirring blades again, entered
the dark tunnel just as the heat-beam sprayed downward, sending the
sand into molten froth. Ketrik groped forward in darkness. The tunnel
leveled and continued. Ketrik's heart leaped as he realized where he
was. This was one of the abandoned Canals which had been filled with
slag from the Martian mines. But years ago pirates had conceived the
unique idea of burrowing through it, making a perfect retreat from
Turibek to the mountains!

       *       *       *       *       *

Suddenly he started. Far behind he heard a scuffle of steps. That could
only be the Martian Special! There was no doubt, now, that word had
gone to Dar Vaajo; they really wanted to stop him! Ketrik grinned and
went on, hurrying his steps a little. Rajecs could see in the dark, but
Martians couldn't. If it came to a showdown....

His grin soon vanished. All about him now he heard vicious little
animal squeals, the scuffing of tiny feet. Scavengers! There must be
thousands of them. He saw their baleful red eyes. They gradually grew
bolder, began nipping at him. Soon his trousers were in shreds from the
knees down, and he felt the flow of blood.

There was one satisfaction. The Martian coming behind must be suffering
the same treatment! But the man kept coming. The footsteps were dogged
and Ketrik knew he had a real antagonist here.

Now the scavengers were becoming more than annoying. He knew that
before he ever reached the city, he would weaken from loss of blood and
they'd pull him down. He could use the electro to clear a path through
the vicious beasts--but he knew the one coming behind was waiting for
that, waiting for any sign of light that would give him a clear target.
Ketrik gritted his teeth and went on, occasionally kicking out at the
beasts in the dark. It didn't do much good.

Then, far ahead, he saw the faintest glow of light. It seemed to come
from around a bend in the tunnel. If he could only get up there in
time--and beyond that light, before his pursuer came into view....

He sprinted ahead now, noiselessly. The scavengers squealed in renewed
fury, racing along beside him. Once he stumbled, felt a horrid mass of
the things swarming. But he fought his way up. By the time he reached
the light, he was sure he had gained a considerable distance on his
pursuer.

He hurried around the bend, saw that the faint light came from a radium
lamp in the ceiling. It had probably been there for years. But what
held his attention, and brought him to a standstill, was the figure
huddling against the wall.

It was an Earthman and he was still alive. His clothes were in shreds
and the rats had been at him--before he reached this light where the
rats did not come. He struggled up weakly, gazed at Ketrik out of
idiotic eyes. Ketrik hurried forward, pulled the man erect.

One look into his gibbering face, and Ketrik felt his stomach turn
over in a prodigious yawn.

_It had taken more than the rats and darkness to do this! The
Earthman's mind had been literally and deliberately blasted!_

Ketrik suddenly remembered what Mark had said of Dr. Ransome, whom
they'd found drifting near the moon ... his mind that of a week-old
infant....

He hurriedly searched the man's clothes, but found nothing. He
knew this must be one of the operatives whom Mark had sent a month
before--E-39 or EV-5. The other must be dead, somewhere in this tunnel
or back at their communications base in the mountains.

He spoke softly to the man, but the other only cringed in terror.
Then, with unexpected strength, he tore himself from Ketrik's grasp
and was scuttling away, back around the bend of the corridor. Ketrik
followed, called a warning. He reached the bend too late. He heard the
hiss of a heat-gun and saw the vivid blue streak of it from out of the
darkness--a streak that touched the Earthman's chest and sent him
crumpling.

Ketrik fired at the spot where the ray had appeared, fired
instinctively but unerringly. He heard a soft moan that ended abruptly,
then a clatter of sound.

He moved slowly forward, hugging the wall. He feared a trick. Past the
little radius of light where the Earthman's body lay, he stumbled upon
the Martian Special. He flashed his electro again and saw that the man
was unmistakably dead. He went back to the Earthman, stared down for a
moment. There was no doubt that he had unwittingly saved Ketrik's life.

"Guess you served your purpose here, after all," Ketrik murmured, but
his thoughts at that moment were not as calloused as the words.

With a few strokes of his electro, he removed the crystyte globe of
radium from the ceiling; and carrying this light, he was no longer
bothered by the scavengers. For hours he proceeded along the tunnel. At
last, infinitely weary and wracked with pain, he reached a blank wall.

Searching around it, he at last found a loose stone which he pulled
away. A tiny metal lever was revealed. After tugging interminably at it
and pounding the rust away, Ketrik managed to pull it slowly back.

The entire wall swung around on pivots. A blast of foul air struck
him. Ketrik stepped into a small passage. He recognized it as one of
the underground sewers of Turibek. He followed it and came to a short
flight of stone stairs leading up to a hinged door. Slowly he shoved it
open.

He was in Turibek! This was one of the narrow, winding streets in the
warehouse district. He glanced at the sky. It was night. Deimos was
gone below the horizon, but Phobos rode high on liquid sapphire.

Ketrik rested there for a few hours until Phobos descended. Then, in
the utterly dark hour that precedes dawn on Mars, he crept forth and
sought the shop of one Jal Thurlo in the Street of the Double Moon.


                                  IV

He found the shop, in a twisting little street that seemed to cringe
from the rest of the city. The insignia of Jal Thurlo was still upon
the door, and Ketrik breathed a sigh of relief.

Finally, after his persistent knocking, the door opened a trifle and
Ketrik saw the wizened little face of Jal Thurlo. The shop-keeper's
eyes were dark with suspicion.

"I was told I would find one Jal Thurlo here," Ketrik said glibly. "I
come with news of a secret shipment. Rare _kaladonis_ furs from the
plains of Io."

"At this ungodly hour?" Thurlo grumbled sleepily.

"It is the proper hour for such matters, thou sulky one! Permit me to
enter now or I take my news elsewhere!"

Thurlo opened the door, and Ketrik slipped into a dark room that
smelled of spices, perfumes, and a miscellany of objects from the far
planets. He followed the little Martian through the shop and along a
dim corridor, until they arrived at the living quarters. There, under
brilliant light, Thurlo faced him. "Who sent you?"

Ketrik answered carefully. He knew this little man carried a needle-gun
in his sleeve and had used it on occasion. "No one. I merely seek haven
here. I once saved your life on Deimos--you remember it?"

Thurlo started visibly. "Ketrik! Is it really you? But no, it cannot
be!"

"It's Ketrik, all right. But 'Khosan' for the time being. Remember
this?" He bared one arm and revealed a long jagged scar from shoulder
to elbow. He further proved his identity by recounting the adventure on
Deimos many years ago, in which he'd received this scar while saving
Thurlo's life. "I must remind you of the Martian blood debt," he ended.
"I saved your life and it is forfeit to me until you repay."

"I have not forgotten!" He looked at the other's torn and bleeding
legs. "Come, man, let me dress those wounds! Then you can tell me why
you are here."

Ketrik recounted part but not all. When he had finished, impressing
upon Thurlo the urgent need to get inside Dar Vaajo's laboratories, the
little Martian shook his head.

"I fear it cannot be done. That part of the city is strictly forbidden.
Vaajo's palace is there, and the homes of his scientists, all
surrounded by the wall. Even the few servants who are permitted to pass
in and out occasionally are painstakingly examined."

"I've got to get in there," Ketrik reiterated. "And I intend to!"

"Wish I could help you. It might be for the best! Dar Vaajo is becoming
as hated as he is feared, yes even by his own people! Something
monstrous and mad is going on in those laboratories!"

"What can you tell me about it?"

Thurlo's eyes became dark, and his voice lowered. "Only this:
Frequently, in the dark of night, a faint greenish glow comes over the
city. It only lasts a few seconds, then withdraws into a pillar of
concentrated fire _directly over the laboratories_! Then it seems to
extend itself, lashing outward into space."

"Greenish fire!" Ketrik exclaimed. "Do you mean electronic power,
Thurlo?"

"No, not that at all. I'm no scientist, but I know this is _cold
light_. It's different--devilish! You may laugh at me, Ketrik, but
I will say it. These radiations seem alien to this world, to this
universe; they seem almost--_alive_!"

But Ketrik did not laugh. He was remembering the mad survivor of a
missing Earth spacer. He was remembering the poor gibbering devil he
had seen but recently in the tunnel. He thought of these and other
things, and felt the hair at the back of his neck begin to rise.

"Why," Thurlo was grumbling, "did Vaajo have to come _here_ to conduct
his devilish experiments? Why could he not have stayed in the northern
capital?"

"Because here he is in close contact with the Rajecs," Ketrik said
experimentally, and watched for the little Martian's reaction.

"Yes!" Thurlo nodded. "I can tell you something about that, too. Under
the treaty, the Rajecs are allowed access to Turibek or, if they wish,
other cities to the north. Vaajo has even built a magnificent temple
here, where they can carry on their own ritualistic worship. Well--I've
seen those black caravans come into the city, quite a number of them in
the past weeks. But one sees little of them afterwards! Of course they
may be shunted further north...."

"No!" Ketrik smacked a fist into his palm. "No, Thurlo, for some reason
they are needed here! It's all a part of Vaajo's plan--I knew it!"

"I care little about the Rajecs," Thurlo shrugged. "It is well that
they disappear."

Ketrik thought differently. He lay awake in the little cubicle to which
Thurlo assigned him, his mind too turbulent for sleep. The pattern,
though still vague, was beginning to take shape. At least he had gained
entrance to Turibek! Tomorrow he would make a short tour about the
city, try to formulate a plan. At last his tired muscles relaxed, and
he dropped into an untroubled sleep.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was high noon when Jal Thurlo wakened him. The little Martian seemed
strangely perturbed. "My friend, there is one at the alley entrance who
asks for you!"

"For me?" Ketrik was up instantly and began dressing with deft, precise
fingers. Who else would know that he had arrived in Turibek? But his
mind was put at ease when he reached the rear entrance. Standing before
him was the somewhat bedraggled but still grinning figure of Aarnto,
the caravan leader.

"Did I not say, Khosan, that the day would soon come when you could
repay me? I remembered well your mention of this shop!" And when
Ketrik hesitated, he went on, "Well, O fugitive of the dark tunnels--am
I not permitted entrance?"

"Come in--quickly!"

Aarnto waved a hand cheerily. "There is no need for alarm. I entered
through the city gates as I said I would. The others have gone to the
temple, but not I. I will need a place...."

Thurlo frowned. Ketrik said, "It's all right, Thurlo. Aarnto's a friend
of mine. Please allow him to stay. I owe a debt too." He turned to
Aarnto. "But listen! Don't draw the Specials here. I can't afford that!"

"I am caution itself, my friend! I too have a mission here. Perhaps
one night's sanctuary is all I shall ask, and your debt is paid." The
black still smiled--with all but his eyes. Behind them Ketrik detected
a hardness and cunning, together with a warning not to ask questions.

Ketrik had no intention of doing that, but he made a resolution to
watch this one. If their paths here should ever chance to cross, Aarnto
would be a tough one indeed! Ketrik left him in Thurlo's capable but
somewhat reluctant hands, while he prepared himself for his tour of the
city.

From the Street of the Double Moon, he emerged into the broader
thoroughfare. Turibek was the metropolis of the south, boasting
of theatres, cafés and shopping centers, as well as a magnificent
spaceport.

Ketrik gave but a glance to the overhead mono-cars, preferring to
stroll leisurely. He found the people, the streets, and the queer
facaded buildings much the same as he'd know them years ago.

There was one startling difference. At the end of this main
thoroughfare a forbidding wall reared up, to extend out of sight in
either direction. That was the wall around the laboratories. Ketrik
could not possibly see what lay beyond.

He made his way slowly in that direction. Thurlo had furnished him with
apparel that stamped him as a prosperous, somewhat foppish Martian,
perhaps a mercantile buyer. He stopped once, listened to news blaring
from a public Tele-system, but it contained nothing of consequence to
him--no mention of Dar Vaajo or local events.

A few minutes later he entered a tiny shop dealing in rare spices and
tobaccos. He purchased a vile but expensive Venusian cigar. He lighted
and drew upon it with evident relish.

"Ah, we do not find these often in Roktol!" he said to the proprietor,
naming a city far to the north. "Turibek has its advantages after all."

"You are a stranger here?"

"Yes, I have just arrived. I am a buyer for Varik's." He saw the man
was impressed. "I find Turibek a fascinating city, but tell me--the
high wall to the east of here--what is it? They would not allow me to
pass!"

"And no wonder, sir. Those walls surround the palace grounds and
laboratories of our Emperor!"

"To be sure! I should have known that." Ketrik smiled, and when he
spoke again there was the slightest hint of mockery. "Ah, but you of
Turibek should be flattered that our Emperor chose your city to carry
on his noble experiments."

The man hesitated, glanced around, but decided to speak. "I think you
know we are not fortunate, sir. What Dar Vaajo is doing may be for the
best ... but if only we were informed!"

Ketrik raised his brows in puzzlement, and the other went on, "Eh, then
you do not know of it? But of course not--you have just arrived. Well,
sir, it is to come again _tonight_--at two hours past the midnight.
This morning's Tele-news warned all residents to stay in their homes at
that hour--and we know what that means."

       *       *       *       *       *

Ketrik knew, too. The green radiance which Thurlo had spoken of.
Tonight! He wanted to observe that display! Then he thought of the
Rajecs, the caravan of two hundred which had just that day entered the
city. His mind leaped. Was it mere coincidence, that upon this very
day...?

He said carelessly, "I have heard that more of those wretched Rajecs
were permitted entrance this morning. It seems a stupid thing, this
treaty which allows the outlanders to pollute our cities!"

"It would seem so, yes. But Dar Vaajo is cunning in his way. Perhaps
the blacks are shipped north, to work the Uranium mines!"

Ketrik dared ask no more questions. He left the shop and continued his
stroll toward the wall. When he came within a block of it he could see
that it wasn't stone, as he had supposed. It was heavy mesh-_duraplon_
reaching twenty feet high, and still higher were the electronic
control-towers. A touch of a button would throw any section of this
wall into flaming, deadly radiance. Here was a formidable barrier!
Ketrik frowned, looking at it--but he didn't dare linger there too long.

He turned back, was crossing the street when he heard a warning shout
and then a clarion-blast. He leaped to the curb just as a vehicle swept
by. It swerved sharply to avoid hitting him. Two others followed--they
were the three-wheeled, electronic-powered cars native to Mars.

From the rear seat of the second car a girl's face peered out, a
bit frightened at the near accident. A golden face, lovely, with
copper-hued hair tumbling in waves to her shoulders, and eyes large and
blue as _asterines_.

This much Ketrik saw, before the cars were gone. He turned and stared.
A section of the _duraplon_ wall slid upward and the cars passed
through; all, except the last one. It turned sharply and came hurtling
back to where Ketrik stood. A pompous Martian climbed out, strode
angrily up to him.

"You! Dolt! The Princess Praana might have been injured! What are
you doing here anyway, so near the grounds? Do you not know it is
forbidden?"

The Princess Praana! Yes, now Ketrik remembered. Dar Vaajo had a
daughter--she had completed her early education at one of Earth's best
schools. That was all of ten years ago, but she had been a pretty child
even then.

"Well! Answer me! Or shall I take you to the Guards for questions?"

Ketrik came out of his reverie and looked at this man. A high-servant
at the palace, probably, judging from his manner. Ketrik bowed coldly.

"I was not aware of the restricted area. I am but newly arrived in
Turibek, and have found your city most charming--until now." There was
the correct amount of annoyance in his voice, plus a subtle warning.
"You wish to see my credentials, sir?"

The other's manner changed. For the first time he seemed to notice
Ketrik's dignified dress and manner. He hesitated.

"I don't suppose that will be necessary, sir. A thousand pardons for
speaking so hastily, but our nerves have been on edge, you know, ever
since the rumor that some of the _S'Relah_ would attempt to enter the
city."

"My dear man! I am sure our Emperor's splendid Guard can deal capably
with these _S'Relah_! I will bid you good day now; I have yet to visit
your charming shops." Ketrik turned haughtily, began his stroll back to
the main avenues. He felt the Martian's puzzled gaze upon him, but did
not look back.

He did not look back until ten minutes later, when he had the eerie
sensation of being followed. He spotted the man at once, undoubtedly a
Special--tall, cold-eyed, a bit too leisurely of manner. Ketrik smiled
grimly, and entered a shop. The man followed. Ketrik came out, and the
Special was just the correct distance behind.

At the next loading platform Ketrik purchased a ticket, waited until
one of the mono-cars dropped down from the single overhead track. He
entered the car, walked the length of it and exited on the opposite
side. He hurried across an area-way and lost himself in the crowd
waiting for the opposite-bound car which just then hove into view. The
simple ruse worked. He boarded this car and there was no sign of his
pursuer.

Dusk was fast coming upon the city when he again made his way to
Thurlo's shop. His mind still wrestled with the problem of the
electronic wall, and how to get beyond it. He immediately discarded
the idea of an aero-copter in the dead of night; there would surely
be detector rays. Here was a problem that called for planning, and
patience.

And something else vaguely bothered him. A vision intruded upon his
thoughts, annoying but persistent--the vision of a girl's face, lovely
and golden....


                                   V

He entered the shop, and was startled to see a Rajec emerge from behind
a counter piled high with silks and fineries. The black was tall,
elderly, a bit stooped, with a nervous twitch at the side of his face.

"Ah, sir, welcome to the humble shop of Thurlo. May I assist you in
a selection? Some of these rare laces from Io, perhaps--or these
exquisite candelabra? Over a thousand years old, sir, yet they have
found their mysterious way here from the Deimian Temple of the
Ancients."

Ketrik smiled a little, picked up the candelabra and set it down. "A
fake. And so are you, Aarnto. I recognize you now."

"But not at first," Aarnto grinned. "I think my disguise will do. Not
as thorough as yours, of course," he added.

"Where is Jal Thurlo?"

"Back there preparing the evening meal." Aarnto's finely chiselled nose
wrinkled appreciatively. "And a welcome repast it will be, after our
miserable desert fare!"

Thurlo had not spared his talents, and the meal proved to be excellent.
Ketrik ate appreciatively but in silence. Thurlo hardly touched
the food, seemed perturbed over something. Only Aarnto was his old
self--more than that! His crisp manner, which Ketrik had noticed
earlier in the day, was gone; he now seemed happy and almost jovial, as
he kept up a running conversation. He told of haggling with one of the
customers over a set of Venusian tapestries, finally getting twice the
expected price.

"And look at this," he held to the light a crystalline jar that adorned
the table. "Would you look at it, Khosan? _Vanadol_, the nectar of the
Gods! An ancient vintage, too! I found it hidden away, far back on one
of the dark shelves. I am sure," he smiled slyly, "that our host can
obtain more where it came from, so let us drink to this occasion." He
poured the blue liquor into their cups. "Yes, Khosan, an occasion--that
two such as you and I should find our way here!"

Ketrik smiled, barely touched the stinging liquor to his lips.

When they had finished the repast, Aarnto rose and excused himself,
but stood a moment hesitant. "I must leave you now, and I may have no
occasion to return here. I wish to thank you, Thurlo, for you have been
most gracious. And you--Khosan. We have been helpful to each other?"

"Yes, Aarnto. You more than I."

"Then the debt is paid." With that, the black was gone, out into the
night which swallowed him up.

Thurlo sighed. "I hope he never returns. I do not like that one! If he
is caught, and it becomes known I harbored one of the _S'Relah_ here,
even for a day.... I only did it for you, Ketrik."

"You needn't worry. He's a clever one. But I wish I knew what they were
up to!"

"They'll fry on Dar Vaajo's torture plates," Thurlo prophesied.

Ketrik thought of his own fate if he were caught, but quickly put it
out of mind. "What do _you_ think they're up to, Thurlo?"

The little Martian spoke slowly. "The _S'Relah_? They are apart from
other Rajecs. Treaties mean nothing to those fanatics. They wish to
strike at Dar Vaajo, and"--he hesitated--"what better way to do it than
through his daughter?"

       *       *       *       *       *

The Princess Praana! Of course that was it! A bold stroke, but just
such a one as the Society of _S'Relah_ would attempt. Ketrik realized
now that some such thought had been hammering at his mind all the
afternoon. He said eagerly, "Tell me about her, Thurlo. I caught a
glimpse of her this afternoon."

"You did? Yes, she visits the shops occasionally, always accompanied by
a bodyguard. The Palace Guard has been doubled too, since these rumors
of the _S'Relah_. I'll wager her father would be furious if he knew
she had left the grounds this afternoon! But that girl has a mind and
temper of her own--so I have heard."

"Has she been here long?"

"No, she flew down from the northern capital only a few weeks ago. That
was against Vaajo's orders, too. I think he'll be sending her back
soon."

Ketrik remained thoughtful. He failed to see how Aarnto and the others
hoped to reach her! For a Martian to get beyond those walls would be a
ticklish problem; for a Rajec, it would be impossible! He heard Thurlo
again.

"That's why I'm worried, Ketrik. Attention is being drawn to my shop.
This afternoon an elderly matron came in--I recognized her, she's been
here before, one of the Princess Praana's personal servants--"

"Go on!" Ketrik was listening now.

"Well, Aarnto was in the front of the shop. He sold her some Ionian
laces, then I saw him speak to her in an undertone and hand her a
folded note. He doesn't know I saw him. I don't like it, Ketrik. I--"

"A note!" Ketrik's mind was racing with the speed of atomotors. "To be
delivered to the Princess, no doubt! Thurlo, tell me--does Praana ever
come here?"

"She would never deign to set foot in this humble part of the city. But
she has undoubtedly heard of my shop...."

"That's it, Thurlo. I think I see their plan now. If you will promise
to retire early tonight, I can guarantee that no word of this will
reach the Emperor's ears."

Thurlo would have promised anything. An hour later all lights were
out, and Ketrik stood in the darkened front of the shop where he could
see the street but remain unseen. If his surmise was correct, he
could thwart the plans of the _S'Relah_. Ordinarily he wouldn't have
bothered, but now he thought he could turn it to his own advantage.

The hours passed. He watched the slow climb of Deimos across the sky.
Its light scarcely touched this cringing little street. Once he saw the
dull lights of a freighter descending, and remembered that just beyond
this district was the freighter spaceport. Occasionally a skulking
figure passed, keeping to the shadows. Once the flash of a heat-pistol
came from a nearby alley, and a moment later the sound of running feet.

Still he waited. He lit a cigarette, keeping the glow of it carefully
hidden. He began to wonder if the Princess would venture into this
place after all. It seemed most unlikely, at this hour! It had been a
crazy idea to begin with. He was clutching at straws. That note which
Aarnto slipped to the servant might have meant something else entirely.

Ketrik dropped the cigarette, ground it savagely underfoot. Then, with
a sharp intake of breath he leaned forward, peering through the window.
From the nearby corner a dark vehicle had glided into the street! It
moved swiftly and silently. It could only be one of the three-wheeled
cars.

It stopped across the street from the shop of Thurlo. For a minute no
one emerged, and Ketrik knew the occupants were surveying the shop. He
drew back a little. Then two figures stepped out, started across the
street. One was a woman. Her steps were unhesitant, even a bit excited.
Ketrik recognized the Princess Praana even from here. The other was a
man, who seemed to be remonstrating with her.

"The fool! The little fool," Ketrik muttered. "But at least, she had
sense enough to bring one of the Guard!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Events happened then with blurring swiftness. The shadows came from
somewhere out of darkness, seemed to glide toward the pair in the
street. In a split second they were upon Praana and the man. Too late
the Guard sensed the danger; he whirled, but in the same instant was
sinking to the street with a Rajec dagger through his heart. The other
Rajec had clapped a hand roughly over the girl's mouth, was dragging
her back to the car.

In those few seconds Ketrik was tugging at the shop door. It seemed
to stick. He cursed, wrenched it open and flung himself into the
street. His gun was out but he saw it was too late; Praana and the two
assailants were already in the car, the motor was whining to life.
Ketrik reached the car in two bounds, just as it hurtled away. He flung
himself blindly at it. His hands managed to grip the rear wheel-guard.
He clung to it, arms wrenching painfully as he was dragged along.

The car slowed, turning into the nearby street, and Ketrik managed to
get his feet up. There he crouched precariously, leaning his weight
forward as the car jolted through rough streets and alleyways. Again he
cursed. He'd lost his gun back there! He didn't think they'd seen him,
though; Praana had fought like a wild _hella_.

They apparently had her under control now, probably had administered a
drug. Ketrik began to take notice of their direction. They were deep in
the dark warehouse district. Suddenly his heart leaped. He knew where
they were going! They intended to get Praana out of the city through
that secret Canal-tunnel! He doubted if there were a dozen men in this
city who knew of its existence, much less its location.

Then they reached it. Ketrik recognized the place, knew he'd have
to act quickly. One of the Rajecs had gotten out, was leaning over,
trying to lift the girl's limp figure down from the seat. Ketrik stole
forward. He put all his weight behind the blow which landed at the
side of the man's neck; it was a dirty blow but this was no time for
niceties. The Rajec crumpled, slid forward against the car.

"What's the matter, Vronu?" The other was Aarnto; Ketrik recognized his
voice. Aarnto came around the front of the car then, and took in the
scene.

Ketrik was tense. But Aarnto didn't move or speak. Not for several
seconds. Then he said, slowly, "So. It is you again, Earthman." He was
calling the terms correctly now. "I thought I had seen the last of you."

Ketrik glanced at Praana's unconscious figure upon the seat. His
eyes flicked back to Aarnto. "My debt is paid, Aarnto! You said it
yourself." With that, his limbs uncoiled and he hurled himself forward.

Aarnto met his rush, sending out a straight jab as he allowed his body
to sway aside. The blow was glancing but powerful enough to send Ketrik
off balance. Ketrik's lips went tight as he whirled back to the attack.
He knew he had his work cut out for him here.

Aarnto seemed slim, but there was weight there and he knew how to use
it. He put it behind every blow. For a few seconds Ketrik found himself
parrying these blows, ducking and rolling and taking a few on the arms
which numbed him. He managed to get a few past Aarnto's guard, but the
Rajec took them too, and pressed his advantage. Ketrik was satisfied
to back away for the moment. His legs were still a little numb from
crouching on the car.

A crashing right came through Ketrik's guard, drawing blood from his
mouth. He countered and missed, as the other leaped away. Again and yet
again this happened, with Ketrik missing almost clumsily; they fought
in near darkness and it was hard to connect with that swift moving
black body!

"So you would interfere, O crudely disguised one!" Again Aarnto's fist
came through, to send Ketrik reeling back. But his legs were less numb
now, and he began to co-ordinate his footwork. His brain was lightning
clear. Aarnto laughed contemptuously, laughed with the joy of battle
and pressed forward, throwing more lefts and rights. They missed as
Ketrik danced away lightly as a _hella_ cat--then Ketrik threw a
boxer's left, long and weaving, that found its mark.

"That better, O haunter of dark places?" He followed it with a right
that crashed against bone, and Aarnto didn't laugh again.

Slowly Ketrik took the initiative, refusing to give way now and
throwing his long left to advantage. He used the other's feral eyes
as a focal point, aiming just below them. He sensed that the other
was weakening. Aarnto gave ground slowly, fighting back. His blows
were still heavy but now his timing was off and Ketrik didn't give
him a chance to regain it. Ketrik's own arms were becoming numb, from
stopping the other's blows. He shifted the attack to the stomach and
Aarnto's guard dropped. A right came up that sent the Rajec staggering.
Ketrik leaped in for the kill, lashed with a left that sent the black
spinning half around.

The right-cross that followed immediately, was the one that did it. It
caught Aarnto at the point of the jaw just below his ear. By the way he
crumpled, Ketrik knew he wouldn't get up for some time.

Ketrik stood there for a moment looking down. A roaring was in his
ears, a vast tiredness came upon him. He wiped blood from his face and
looked at his bruised fists.

A sound came from behind him. He whirled.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was Praana. She stood there, looking small but somehow not
frightened, staring at Aarnto's prone figure. She reached into her
tunic and drew out a small electro. Before Ketrik could realize her
intention, she aimed it at Aarnto.

He snatched the gun away just in time. "You'd kill him in cold blood?"

"He's a Rajec. And a member of the _S'Relah_!"

"Oh, you realize that how, do you? Well, listen to me. He fought
fairly--had a dagger there in his belt, and could have used it. So he
gets a break."

She turned an angry face to him, started to speak, but he stopped her
with a gesture. "Quiet! Listen!"

       *       *       *       *       *

From somewhere near came the sound of scuffing feet. Ketrik moved
swiftly to a little metal door between two buildings. This was the door
to the sewer, which in turn led into the secret tunnel. Presently it
opened, and Ketrik saw the yellowish glow of eyes. Rajec eyes, many of
them--perhaps eight or ten. Ketrik stepped back. He gave a burst with
the electro, allowed the beam to cut a frothing path very near the
doorway. The black figures drew back.

"You get these two, and that's all!" He indicated Aarnto and Vronu.
"Two of you step forward and get them. Quickly, now!" He gestured
meaningfully with the weapon.

Two of the Rajecs crept out, watching him all the while. They seized
the limp figures and dragged them back. Ketrik followed. "All the way!
Clear back into the tunnel. I'm letting you off easy. Be glad you don't
get Vaajo's torture plates for this night's work!"

He herded them all into the tunnel, then swung the pivoted door shut. A
steady play of the electro-beam fused the mechanism so that it wouldn't
work again, ever. He knew they might use their knives, loosen the stone
blocks enough to gain another entrance, but he didn't care about that
now.

He hurried back to the street, found Praana still waiting. Her fists
were clinched and her voice sharp. "You take a lot upon yourself! Those
were the _S'Relah_ and should be turned over to the Guard!"

Not a word of thanks, no show of gratitude. Ketrik let his own voice
rasp. "It isn't important. You were a little fool to leave the Palace!
Why did you do it?"

"Then you know I am the Princess Praana! And you--you dare to speak to
me like that!" She raised her fists, seemed about to strike him--then
a thought occurred. "Rilon--he--where is he? What happened?" Then she
shuddered, as though suddenly remembering.

"I suppose you mean your Guard," Ketrik said with no attempt to spare
her feelings. "He's lying back in the Street of the Double Moon with a
dagger through his heart, thanks to you."

"Thanks to me," she whispered, all the spirit gone out of her now.
"I shall never forgive myself! He warned me, tried to stop me, even
pleaded--and when I threatened to come alone...."

Ketrik said sternly, "Why should you want to come at all--to this
miserable part of the city?"

"You are right, I was a fool. Occasionally I send a servant to the shop
of one Jal Thurlo, to pick up a rare article that would never find its
way to Mars by the ordinary routes--you understand? This afternoon my
servant brought me exciting news. In his shop Jal Thurlo had a single
bottle of the perfume from the Deimian Temple of the Ancients! Can you
understand what that means? That rare, that glorious perfume...."

Yes, Ketrik could understand. He smiled at Aarnto's cunning. Women
would give their money, their jewels, everything they held precious,
for a single dram of that perfume which was so rare as to be almost
non-existent.

"But," Praana went on, "it was to be smuggled away from Mars tonight!
It was to go to the Princess Aladdian on Venus! The note said that if I
were to see Jal Thurlo tonight, I might persuade him--"

Ketrik felt suddenly sorry for her. She was almost in tears. "It was
a trick of the _S'Relah_," he said, "and Jal Thurlo knew nothing of
it. As for the Deimian perfume--my dear girl! I happen to know that
the last of it was smuggled to Earth some years ago, and sold for
a fabulous price." Ketrik neglected to mention that he himself had
engineered the feat.

She smiled wistfully. "You have saved my life, and I have learned a
great lesson. I owe you for both." She suddenly removed a bracelet of
Martian diamonds. Ketrik waved it away, and she frowned in puzzlement.
"Is it not enough?"

It was not nearly enough. What he wanted was to get beyond the
electronic wall. He came near to hinting at it, but checked himself. No
need to press his luck too far.

He bowed elegantly. "To have been of service to you, Princess, is
reward enough in itself."

She was impressed, insisted on knowing his name and where he could
be reached. He gave her the information with seeming reluctance. She
assured him she could make her way back to the palace alone. "You shall
be rewarded, nevertheless," were the last words Ketrik heard as she
drove the car away. And he smiled inwardly.

       *       *       *       *       *

He was jubilant, retracing his route through the dark streets. Dar
Vaajo would certainly send for him tomorrow! For he knew that Praana
would tell her father of this.

It was just past the midnight hour, and suddenly he remembered
something. This was the hour ... but even as the thought crossed his
mind, the phenomenon came. It came as a greenish glow rising above the
city center, spreading swiftly outward. As it spread, like a blanket of
palely pulsing light, a frightening _malignancy_ came with it.

Then it touched upon Ketrik, and he reeled. The cold light was all
about him, surging through him. Tightening tendrils of it clutched
at his brain. A vast singing was in his ears. He fought back,
fought as his mind reeled upon a chaos of vertiginous horror! Those
light-tendrils tearing at his brain, eagerly, hungrily--here was Dar
Vaajo's weapon and he knew it, even as he fell to the street to lie
exhausted, his mind going away....

Still he tried to fight, knowing it was hopeless. An agony was in him,
tearing at his fingertips and through every muscle; wrenching at his
brain, seeking to tear it apart fiber by fiber. He felt his sanity
going; it was being _drained_ away as liquid is sucked through a
straw. He laughed once, wildly. He felt other light-tendrils seeking,
seeking hungrily all about him. With a last vestige of mental power he
remembered again a gibbering madman in a dark tunnel....

Then the light was going away. It receded, rushing back upon itself,
coalescing into a mass of greenish radiance that swirled and twisted
angrily and tried to escape. Almost _alive_! As Jal Thurlo had said!
Ketrik rose and stood swaying, his head throbbing, as he watched it
from afar.

Now the spherical mass of it, deeper in hue and pulsing angrily,
hovered in the sky just above Vaajo's laboratories. Suddenly the sphere
extended, became a pillar of pulsing light trying to leap away.

And it leaped away. Faster than light, swift as thought, hurtling
through the outer reaches of space.

Ketrik didn't stay to see more. He didn't need to. Even through the
cold needle-fires in his brain, he had enough faculty left to know that
far out in space, in that part of the heavens, swam the planet Earth.
Again this night Dar Vaajo was testing ... testing the power of his
curiously-alive weapon....

Ketrik reached the shop of Jal Thurlo, found the jar of _vanadol_ and
downed enough of it to put him into merciful oblivion.


                                  VI

It was late the following day when a car, bearing the royal insignia,
drew up before the shop and one of the Guards asked for "Khosan."

Ketrik was ready. He'd been waiting for this. As they drove toward the
palace grounds the two Guards looked at him enviously.

"You have won great favor with the Emperor for last night's work,"
one of them said. "He wants personal audience with you! It would not
surprise me if he made you Captain of Praana's own guard!"

"It is true you were not supposed to be on the streets at that hour,"
said the other. "But Dar Vaajo will overlook that, considering the
circumstances."

Ketrik remembered that Praana was not supposed to be on the streets
either, but he didn't voice the thought. They reached the electronic
wall. One of the men gave the signal, and a section of it moved upward.
Their car passed through.

At last he was inside the forbidden grounds! Ketrik remained outwardly
humble, but he kept his eyes open. They went along a sweeping drive
bordered by stately _majagua_ trees. They passed a few buildings,
fronted by splendid lawns. Then the palace itself loomed ahead, a
magnificent two-storied structure of dark _culchite_ marble.

But Ketrik had no eyes for it. To the left was a building equally
imposing, and covering more area, which could only be the royal
laboratories! It was undoubtedly from that building that the phenomenon
had come the night before. He noticed the roof in particular,
glass-covered, curving into a shallow dome. If Dar Vaajo favored him,
he could get a position in there....

Then they were past the building and approaching the palace. The
audio-tube near the driver's head crackled to life, and a voice came
through. Ketrik couldn't hear the words. A startled look appeared on
the Guard's face. "Are you sure?" he said. "My orders were--"

"These are new orders! Obey them!" Ketrik heard those words all right.
The audio went dead. The driver wheeled the car around abruptly, headed
away from the palace.

"Something wrong?" Ketrik asked.

"Plans have been changed. Dar Vaajo doesn't want to see you quite yet."
The man's voice was grim.

Ketrik felt a sudden foreboding. "Where are you taking me, then?"

No answer. Ketrik glanced at the Guard sitting next to him. This man
had gone grim too, as his hand rested lightly on the electro beneath
his tunic. Ketrik couldn't guess what had gone wrong or why, but he
knew he wasn't going to see Dar Vaajo under favorable circumstances. He
went tight inside.

They stopped before a low stone building. The driver came around,
opened the car door. "Out!" he ordered curtly.

Ketrik came out. He launched himself bodily, his fist smashing to the
other's face and making a bloody smear of it. The man staggered back.
The momentum carried Ketrik out of the car and to his knees. He heard
the rush of the other Guard, whirled to meet it. Too late. He only saw
the dark blur of the man's arm coming down in a swift arc, then heavy
metal crashed behind his ear, leaving him stunned.

His muscles wouldn't pull him up. The blows came again ... more than
once, heavy and accurate. He ploughed forward onto cold pavement as his
mind blanked out.

       *       *       *       *       *

He came again to consciousness, groaned as heavy pain hammered through
his skull. Gradually his eyes focused upon the details of the room.
There weren't many details. It was a small room, quite bare. The floor
was stone but the walls seemed to be of thick _crystyte_. Dim lights
filtered through. There was no entrance of any kind that he could see.

"So you are awake at last, Earthman. And none the worse for wear." The
voice came from within the room. Ketrik raised his head, stared at the
opposite wall, a section of which had taken on the silvery radiance of
a tele-vise.

Imaged there were the features of Dar Vaajo. Ketrik recognized him
immediately.

It was an elderly face, but smooth--with the color and toughness
and texture of old leather. The lips were tight and purposeful, the
cheek-bones bulged beneath crisp, graying hair. And the eyes ... they
held Ketrik. They weren't old eyes. They were hard and bright as
jewels. An indomitable light came up from the dark depths of them.

Dar Vaajo spoke again from the screen.

"As you see, I prefer to hold audience with you in this manner. You are
a dangerous man. Yes, very dangerous, to have come so far. Through my
Space Patrol. Past my Specials. Into the city and past the inner wall
itself." The lips quirked a little. "Yes, I have determined everything
about you. Your name is not Khosan, but George Ketrik--I have heard
something of your exploits in the past. You are the spy sent here by
the Earth Councillor, Mark Travers." Again he paused. "You are not
surprised that I know all this?"

If he was surprised, Ketrik didn't show it in the slight shrug he gave.
He knew the voice would go on.

"I have learned this," Vaajo said, "within the past few hours. You
see--we, too, have a development of the Scanner Beam. This beam was
trained upon you from the very moment you drove into the palace
grounds. We learned your true identity and purpose."

Ketrik went dry inside. It would have to be that, the one thing he
couldn't have foreseen! He spoke to the screen. "Very well, so I have
lost. I suppose I can expect no reward for saving the Princess."

Something showed in the dark depths of Vaajo's eyes. Amusement? But he
spoke thoughtfully. "Very well, you shall have your reward. I think I
will send you back to Mark Travers--in a most unique way!"

Quite suddenly then, Ketrik knew. He knew the reason for the beam he
had seen launched into space, and almost he grasped the principle of
it. He felt his insides twisting up into cold, hard knots. But he
managed to say, "You mean--that just a part of me will go."

Vaajo chuckled. "So. You saw last night's display, felt a taste of it
perhaps, and you have guessed. Yes, your surmise is correct! We utilize
the Rajec caravans. Two hundred yesterday, and fine specimens they
were! But they are now mere walking hulks, devoid of all but the most
meager mental impulses. Their bodies will be sent north to work the
Uranium pits. Their minds have already been absorbed into my--shall we
say, weapon, increasing its potential considerably."

Ketrik's brain seemed to twist inside his skull, until he could not
tell whether he felt horror or fury or both. He only knew he must keep
control, learn more of this grisly thing that Vaajo was conducting with
human minds.... He found his own voice, hard and dry, saying, "Yes, I
saw it last night, felt it ... but still I cannot understand...." He
passed a hand across his forehead in seeming bewilderment. He heard
Vaajo saying, "It cannot matter now, for my beam reached Earth last
night ... yes, it would please me to tell you something of it! You
must have heard of the ancient city of M'Tonak, lying far beneath
Mars' Polar Cap. And the sentient thought-force that came from outer
space, or another dimension--no one ever knew--to land at M'Tonak where
it remained for untold centuries. Through all that time the Entity
remained barely alive, unknown to man, sustaining itself by sending out
invisible radiations that fed on Martian minds! And you must have heard
of the Earthman, Jim Landor, who found his way there and destroyed the
Entity, leaving it crushed beneath tons of ice. All this was before
your time or mine. Over a hundred years ago...."[3]

[Footnote 3: _City of the Living Flame_, Planet Stories, Fall, 1942.]

Ketrik nodded. He had heard the story many times.

       *       *       *       *       *

Dar Vaajo went on. "The story of the thought-entity beneath our ice
cap had always intrigued me," he said. "So several years ago I sent
some workmen to uncover that ancient city. Yes, you have guessed. The
Entity hadn't died! It remained there insentient but alive, frozen into
suspended animation beneath miles of ice! It was then that I remembered
the stories of its power, its insatiable appetite for the mental forces
of man ... and thereupon I evolved my scheme. It has been dangerous,
Ketrik, but I worked slowly and carefully.

"The first step was to waken it, which was easy. The second step was
to keep it under control--not so easy. But I managed this by means of
Uranium rays which seems to be the only thing capable of combating
the Entity's own peculiar atomic structure. That was the reason for
my Uranium embargo; I've had to increase the potential of these
controlling rays as the Entity grew in size and power."

"You mean you ... _fed it_? Allowed it to _grow_?" Ketrik was aghast,
listening to this cold-blooded recital.

"Of course! How else was I to reach Earth with it, across miles of
space? That was my ultimate goal."

"But how? It must have taken a tremendous ... surely the Rajecs were
not enough?"

Vaajo smiled blandly from the screen. "I told you I worked slowly.
I began by communicating with it, telepathically. Yes! It's a
highly intelligent entity, and it wishes to remain alive. It seems
it came originally from a world _in another dimension bordering on
ours_! It was the creation of a scientist on that world. The Entity
became dangerous, threatened to get out of control, and could not be
destroyed. The scientists rigged up a contra-dimensional device which
hurled it out of that dimension. It landed quite by chance in ours--on
Mars, near M'Tonak.

"So we made a sort of pact, the Entity and I. I wished it to grow
in size and potential, but not at the sacrifice of my own people. I
told it something of my plans. It, in turn, told me how to build a
contra-dimensional machine by which to project it back into its own
world! I managed this at last, adding a reverse control by which I
could always bring it back.

"Fully a dozen times now it has crossed the dimensions. Whenever I
brought it back, it had ... _fed_. You understand? It was satiating
itself upon the populace of that other world! Until finally, it
revealed to me that ... there was no more. The other-dimensional world
was barren of sustenance!

"By this time, however, I was almost ready. It had grown tremendously
in size and power. I always added more rays to keep it under control.
Then I began testing for Earth, allowing it to reach out. Have you
realized what a terrible weapon concentrated and projected thought
can be? Several times it touched Earth spacers, absorbed the minds
aboard them, and"-- Dar Vaajo shrugged--"I had to send my Patrollers
out afterwards to destroy the spacers. But never were we quite able
to reach Earth! It would take more potential, just a little more, and
where was I to find it? Then I thought of the Rajecs. I made treaty
with them, built the temple here to attract them ... I guess you know
the rest."

Ketrik knew the rest, and more. He knew that Earth would have
to capitulate to Vaajo's demands, or face destruction by a
mind-destroying, mind-feeding Entity now capable of reaching across
space. Venus would undoubtedly be next, leaving Dar Vaajo in control
of the inner planets including the colonies recently established on
Jupiter's moons.

"So, Ketrik, I shall send you back to Mark Travers," Dar Vaajo was
saying. "Four days from now the orbits of our two planets reach their
nearest juxtaposition. _Then_ is when the Entity shall reach out
again for Earth, to give another sample of my power." Vaajo smiled
maddeningly just before he caused the screen to blank out. "And isn't
it ironic that you, or rather the mental part of you, shall be an
infinitesimal part of it!"


                                  VII

It seemed hours later when Ketrik awoke. He had tried in vain to find
a way out of the smooth, _crystyte_-walled room. He had sought to
loosen one of the heavy stones in the floor until, with bleeding and
broken-nailed fingers, he had fallen into a sleep of sheer exhaustion.

Now, in the exact center of the room, he noticed a platter of food. He
frowned, until it dawned on him that it must have been lowered from the
ceiling! He glanced up, but if the entrance was there, it was tightly
closed now.

He ate the palatable food, but noticed the platter was of light
plastex, could not possibly be used as a weapon or anything else. He
made another search through his clothes, knowing it was useless. But
suddenly he remembered the tiny scanner disc which Mark had given him.
He had strapped it tightly to the underside of his arm ... and it was
still there!

He could think of no use for it now, however. He was still pondering
this, when his attuned ears caught a faint sound of footsteps overhead.
A moment later a section of the ceiling slid back. Framed in the square
of light Ketrik saw a face ... golden, a bit frightened.

Praana! Ketrik's heart leaped.

"Speak softly," she whispered. "You are in a room directly beneath the
main palace. Father has gone for the moment, and I took this chance...."

"Why are you here?"

She spoke quickly. "A few hours ago I tuned my tele-vise into this
one. I heard everything he told you! It's horrible, what he is
doing--unbelievable! I hadn't known before! I knew he was conducting
some sort of experiment ... but this...." The shock of it, even
disbelief, was still mirrored on her face.

"Praana, listen to me! Doesn't your father have an Ethero-Magnum here,
capable of reaching Earth?"

"Yes, in his own private quarters." She was puzzled.

"You must get to it! Tune it into the Earth beam, then give me a
channel from this tele-vise here, into that beam. If I can reach Mark
Travers, I'll have him send the Earth Fleet!"

He saw her hesitate. She knew that Mars' patrollers could not stand
against Earth's mighty armada. She was visioning the holocaust, the
destruction of Martian cities and her own people. Ketrik went on
quickly.

"Praana, you've been to Earth! You spent most of your girlhood there,
and you must remember it still, have a fondness for it! The green
forests and wide lakes, the mountains, the unreal clouds in a blue
sky--and the people who treated you kindly! All this will go, unless
you act. Surely--"

"Mars is my world," she was murmuring. "My own people ... to consign
them to another horrible war! Mars would never recover."

"It will not come to that! If Earth takes the initiative, sends its
Fleet in a surprise attack--the display of power will be enough. Dar
Vaajo will be helpless in the face of it." Ketrik was not at all sure
this would be the case, but here was his only chance. "Quickly ... we
haven't much time!"

Praana was wavering. "You saved my life," she whispered. "Yes, I will
try!" She tossed an electro-gun down to him, her own gun. Then she was
gone, as the ceiling door went shut.

Ketrik waited, facing the wall which he knew was the tele-vise. Minutes
passed, seemed to lengthen interminably. If he couldn't get through to
Mark ... if Praana failed to gain access to the Ethero-Magnum, that was
his last hope.... He wondered if she knew how to operate it!

Suddenly a pale glow came across the wall, wavered for a moment
and then deepened. He was looking into a luxurious room which must
be somewhere in the palace above him. At the far end he saw the
magnificent Ethero-Magnum, with Praana standing before it manipulating
the controls. He heard the ascending whine as selenic cells poured
power into the beam, then minutes passed as it gained full strength. At
last a voice came through faint and clear! Mark Travers' voice saying
cautiously, "Go ahead, go ahead! You're on Earth beam."

"Ketrik speaking! Mark, listen carefully now and act fast! Mass the
Earth Fleet, get it to Mars. Blast the city of Turibek clear off the
planet if you have to! Things--"

"The Fleet," Mark cut in, "is already on its way, in full battle
formation! Something happened here about thirty hours ago that I
suspect is Vaajo's work! Touched an area just south of Kansas City.
It's horrible! Everyone within that area--"

"Spare me the details, I know them anyway. Dar Vaajo plans to give you
another taste in three days, on what I think will be a vastly wider
scale! After that, he'll probably give his ultimatum."

"What is it he's got there?" Mark's voice was harried. "And where are
you--"

"No time to tell you now! You wouldn't believe me anyway, and there's
no defense against it except to get that Fleet here and fast! I only
hope--"

The beam went suddenly dead. For a second the screen blurred, then
Ketrik was looking into the room of the Ethero-Magnum again. But it was
a different scene now.

       *       *       *       *       *

Different, because Dar Vaajo strode swiftly into view! He approached
Praana who straightened up suddenly from the Magnum's panel. Vaajo was
trembling with rage, but Praana faced him defiantly. For a moment no
one spoke. Then Vaajo turned, facing the screen so Ketrik could see
him. Anger was still on his face, but something of triumph too.

"I really should thank you, Ketrik--and my daughter! I couldn't, have
planned it better myself. So the entire Earth Fleet is coming, and I am
warned! I shall wait until they are almost here before I use my weapon;
yes, it should cover the entire expanse of the Fleet at one stroke!
And after that"--he shrugged, permitted his cruel lips to fashion the
faintest of smiles--"after that, what shall I have to fear from a Fleet
manned by mindless idiots? Yes, it will be a master stroke! Again I
thank you."

He flicked off the control. The screen before Ketrik's eyes went dead,
almost as dead as the hope within him.

The Fleet might have gotten through and taken Vaajo unawares, if it
hadn't been for him! Now Vaajo was warned, and Ketrik knew it was no
idle boast he had made. The awful power of the Entity was quite capable
of dealing with the Earth Fleet, especially as the Commanders had
no idea of the type of thing they were facing. That it would strike
suddenly and completely, Ketrik had no doubt.

His soul was bitter within him. He had but one chance left, a wild
and improbable chance, but he mustn't miss! It was hours later when
he again heard footsteps overhead. He threw himself to the floor,
pretended to be asleep. The electro was in his hand, carefully
concealed beneath him.

As he thought, it was a Guard bringing him food. From lowered lids he
saw the ceiling trap slide back--slowly at first, then wider. The Guard
leaned over, concentrated on lowering the platter of food on a long
cord. When it had almost touched the floor, Ketrik brought out his hand
and fired. It was simple as that. The man's body toppled through the
opening, made a dull thud on the floor below.

So far so good, Ketrik thought grimly. He bunched the dead man's limbs
under him, stood upon the sagging shoulders and leaped for the opening.
A moment later he was swinging his body up and through.

He was in a dim, carpeted corridor, probably part of the servants'
quarters. He hurried softly past a row of doors to the end of the hall,
then up a short flight of stairs. A heavy door faced him. He pushed
it open cautiously, then stepped out into a small flower garden. It
was night, but Phobos was making a brilliant path across the sky.
Unfortunate. But he'd have to make the best of it now.

He hugged the shadows until he got his bearings. This was the rear
of the palace, he realized; at least that was lucky, for it brought
him closer to that glass-domed building which he was sure was Vaajo's
laboratory. It should be somewhere to the left of here.

Swiftly he crossed the garden. He passed through a tall hedge which
concealed him from the palace. He followed the shadow of it all the way
to the left, until he came in sight of the laboratory building. It was
lying only fifty yards away--but fifty yards drenched in Phobos' glow!

He hesitated. But there was no other way. He started across the space
leisurely, remembering he was still "Martian." The building was dark,
there seemed to be no Guards about.

He was wrong in the latter surmise, he learned when he had almost
reached the building. A voice challenged him. Almost in the same
instant he saw the man, deep in the shadow of an arched doorway. Ketrik
veered toward him, grunted something in reply and raised a hand in
casual greeting. The Guard hesitated. Ketrik came two steps nearer. The
Guard dropped a hand to his gun, and Ketrik hurled himself forward--low
and hard.

The impact carried the Guard backward. Their combined weight crashed
into a door, nearly taking it from the hinges. Ketrik rose quickly but
the Guard didn't rise at all, and Ketrik knew his luck was still with
him.

He changed his mind a second later. He heard shouts and pounding feet.
Guards were all about the place, probably stationed at each of the
doors! For a split second Ketrik hesitated. The only way now, was _in_.

He hurled his weight forward and the already weakened door crashed open.

       *       *       *       *       *

He hurried recklessly forward through darkness. He touched a smooth
marble wall, allowed his fingertips to brush lightly along it as he
ran. His racing feet sent up echoes in the hollow place.

The Guards were crowding through the doorway behind him now. Suddenly
lights leaped up! Just as suddenly, Ketrik swerved aside. An
electro-beam hummed, came so close to him he could feel the swirling
heat. He hurled himself into a dim cross-corridor, as more electros
lanced out. But Ketrik was expert at this game. He raced for a stairway
he could see just ahead. He was halfway up when the others came into
view below him. He whirled, gave a sweeping burst with his own gun
that sent them tumbling back out of range. He gained the second floor
corridor.

Suddenly the lights came on there too! Someone at the master-switch
was throwing on light all over the place! Ketrik preferred darkness.
He couldn't keep this up interminably. Feet pounded on the stairs now.
He opened the nearest door, slipped into a dark room. There he stood
breathing heavily as the pursuers pounded by. He waited until their
footsteps died away, then opened the door a crack.

It was almost his undoing. A beam creased his hair. He drew back, then
suddenly flung the door wide and fired at the man they had left to
guard the stairs. His beam sliced across the Guard's wrist, sent his
gun spinning. But the man's scream of pain sent up shrill echoes that
would bring the others back. Ketrik bowled the man aside as he leaped
for the stairs leading up. At least he'd gained a few minutes!

He wasn't fleeing blindly now. He had an objective. He was sure the
place he sought lay _above_--somewhere near that great, curved glass
roof. He reached the third floor and continued upward. Then he groaned.
The stairs ended at the next floor. A heavy metal door barred his way.
He wasted precious seconds fumbling at the complicated mechanism--was
about to use his electro to burn it away, when the great handle slid
down under his pressure and the ponderous door swung aside. He leaped
forward into more darkness.

There he paused, electro raised. This would be cutting off his own
retreat, but he had to do it now! The beam lashed out, played across
the door's inner mechanism. Gradually the tough metal fused under the
heat. Ketrik made a thorough job of it, was satisfied at last that it
would take them some time to blast through!

But he couldn't hear them out there. They should have reached the
door by this time. He frowned, then drew out the short-wave scanner
disc. He pressed the stud and tiny coils hummed to life. He moved the
sliding sheathes around the rim and at last a thought-impression came
through--a jumble of them. Ketrik knew his pursuers were standing on
the stairs, hesitant and a bit frightened, staring at the metal door.
Then a stronger impression came out of the thought-jumble as one of the
Guards spoke. "Shall we go ahead? We can burn through the door."

"Enter that place?" came an answer, and Ketrik felt the mental shudder
that came with the words. "I'd sooner go unarmed into a den of
_hellas_!"

Other thoughts agreed. Ketrik grinned there in the dark. He knew now,
that somewhere beyond him must be the lair of Dar Vaajo's _Entity_, and
these men were deathly afraid of it. Finally another thought stabbed
through.

"Very well. There's no retreat for him now anyway. We'll wait here, but
one of you hurry to the palace and bring Dar Vaajo!"

Ketrik acted quickly then. He found the lights, saw that he was in a
small metal-walled room. On the opposite side was another door, and
near it was a tall case containing half a dozen protective suits.

He hurriedly donned one. It wasn't hard to guess what they were
for. The suit itself was of light mesh-beryllium, topped by a heavy
_crystyte_ helmet. Again he brought his weapon into play, destroyed the
other five suits. Let Vaajo come! He would hardly dare enter this den
without protective gear!

But even within the suit Ketrik didn't feel quite safe. He still
remembered the power of the thing he had felt the previous night. His
stomach turned over in a frightened yawn as he stepped through the
opposite door.


                                 VIII

He was on a wide balcony. Near at hand was a tele-vise, a
control-studded panel, and other complicated machinery. Overhead,
seeming so near he could almost touch it, the great laboratory
dome stretched out and away in its vast curve. While below ... was
emptiness. Now for the first time he realized the gigantic proportions
of this building. A hundred feet below he saw bare floor. Probably
twice that distance away, straight across from him, he could make out
the opposite wall. There was nothing more, nothing in all that maw of
space.

Peering at the walls, he saw strange instruments protruding. Short and
tubular, literally thousands of them reached from the floor to the
height of this balcony, stretching away across the walls as far as he
could see. Ketrik thought he knew what they were--but he had to be sure.

He looked at the controls all about him. One huge panel contained
thousands of studs. He depressed one. From the far away opposite wall
a ray of white light needled out and slightly downward. He swept his
hand across more studs, and other beams lanced out from the four
walls--dozens, then hundreds. Ketrik was satisfied. Here, he knew were
the controlling rays which Vaajo had spoken of. He shut the rays off,
and looked further about him.

There was only the tele-vise, and two other instruments. One was merely
a wheel, six feet in diameter. The other was a machine complicated
beyond anything Ketrik had ever imagined. Giant tubes, coils, and alien
looking grids nestled in the bulk of it. Cables thick as his arm led
to the nearest wall, thence upward to the lower rim of the glassite
dome, and completely around it. From there, other cables dangled
downward for a few feet into empty space.

Ketrik approached the control panel. It seemed simpler than he had
supposed, but he studied it a while before reaching out a tentative
hand to the first switch. The coils shrieked maddeningly, then the
sound ascended the scale and passed beyond the audible. The giant tubes
pulsed to life, throwing out a silver radiance. Then Ketrik reached out
to what seemed to be a master-lever. He pulled it slowly toward him.

There came a sound, a sighing, which rose to tremendous crescendo as
though every wind from the depths of space were sweeping in upon him!
An awful vertigo as the dome, the floor, and all space between seemed
to tilt crazily--into _nothingness_! He clung to the lever, sought to
push it back. His mind reeled. Everything before him was merging into a
grotesquerie of impossible angles and planes--and through it all came a
twisting vortex of darkness, utter emptiness, that sought to sweep him
out and away!

Then the lever gave before his surging muscles. It fell back into
place. Everything came back to normal--except Ketrik. He allowed the
dizziness to pass, and then grinning, he tried the stunt again! Two,
three times more he tried it, with the same result, until he was quite
sure of his mastery over that control.

For here was the machine he had hoped to find! Here was the means
and the only means, of ridding the System once and for all of that
Entity which Dar Vaajo in his madness had built up into such a weapon;
a terribly alive weapon which, if allowed to go unchecked, with or
without Dar Vaajo, could well become a menace to all the worlds! Ketrik
realized that his task had reached the crucial point. A single mistake
now, a mere miscalculation, and all would be over. So far he had only
seen a manifestation of the Entity, not the thing itself. But he knew
it must be here, somewhere very close--and waiting....

He stepped over to the towering perpendicular wheel.

       *       *       *       *       *

It moved easily beneath his hand. He was tense now, watching the great
expanse of floor a hundred feet below. His surmise was correct. A tiny
crack appeared there, extending the length of the floor. And upward
from it came light--greenish, terrible light which he'd felt before,
which he knew was the Entity itself, eager to lash outward! Almost,
Ketrik hesitated. But he forced his hand to move the wheel.

The crack widened as the floor moved away on either side. Gradually he
could see the Entity, the very bulk of it--maddening, impossible--but
there it was! Fully a hundred feet across, greenish and blinding!
It was roughly globular, seemed to be a giant brain slowly pulsing
and evilly alive, yet somehow it was more than that. It was
quasi-amorphous, writhing and changing shape and trying to heave itself
upward! Tentacles lashed out--tentacles that seemed to be solidified
light, seeking ... seeking for sustenance!

It began to move upward. Up between the walls on a sliding platform,
to a point just above the floor, where it stopped. Some of its light
touched Ketrik, beat against his helmet and surged about him, tearing
with cold fingers at his beryllium suit. In his absorbing interest he
had almost forgotten the controlling rays! He hurled himself at the
panel. With reckless sweeps of his hands he flicked on the studs.

[Illustration: _It began to move upward ... to beat against Ketrik,
surging ... tearing._...]

He had been just in time. The white rays, lancing out from the walls,
now formed a gorgeous criss-crossing pattern that held the Entity in
leash. It writhed and cowered. Slowly its own tentacles of light drew
back. It lay in seeming quiescence. But even then Ketrik received its
thought-emanations, as they crashed with frightening impact upon his
brain. Yes, the thing was alive and evil. Too long had Dar Vaajo held
it in subservience. It wished to escape these barriers, launch out
for itself. There was sustenance aplenty on Mars, and it would grow
titanically. Then would come Earth--and there were many other planets.

Perhaps the Entity sensed Ketrik's rising horror. Perhaps it guessed
what he meant to do! For now, despite the concentration of rays, it
tried to lash out in new fury. Ketrik laughed then, a bit wildly;
laughed in mockery and joy, seeing the thing in thrall, watching its
futile efforts against the barriers....

Then the laughter died in his throat. Something was happening. The
rays, the controlling rays across the walls--one by one they were
blanking out! One by one, then suddenly whole rows at a time!

       *       *       *       *       *

Ketrik whirled to the control-panel. Another figure was there--Dar
Vaajo! Somewhere he had obtained another protective suit, had entered
silently. Now he was blanking out the control-rays, enough of them to
allow the power of the Entity through!

Even as Ketrik hurled himself forward, he saw madness on Vaajo's face.
More of the rays blanked off as Vaajo swept his hand down. Then Ketrik
was upon him. The two metal-suited figures clashed, went spinning
backward and then to the floor of the balcony in a wild tangle.

Dar Vaajo was old but he was still tough and wiry. He had the strength
of a madman now. He kept Ketrik at bay as the latter sought to grip
his throat. He laughed wildly as Ketrik pounded futilely at the tough
_crystyte_ helmet. Then Ketrik knew why he laughed. The damage had been
done, the power of the Entity was lashing through the barriers now! A
tendril of light curled about Ketrik's head. Even through the helmet he
felt the insatiable greed of it, as his brain exploded in fire.

[Illustration: _Dar Vaajo was old but he was still tough and wiry._]

He forgot Dar Vaajo, managed to drag himself upward. He staggered
toward the huge Vortex machine. Vaajo hurled against his legs and
brought him crashing down. His brain was now a writhing agony of fire.
He saw Vaajo's grinning face near his own, and knew that somehow Vaajo
wasn't affected by the Entity; perhaps years of working so close to
it had made him partially immune. Slowly Ketrik managed to bring his
knees up under the other's body, then his feet. With his last remaining
strength he lashed out.

He saw the Martian's slight body hurl backward. It crashed into the
balcony's low railing which caught him just at the knees. For a moment
Vaajo tottered, arms flailing wildly; then his mouth opened in what
must have been a shriek as he went over the edge, over and downward,
to crash a hundred feet below into the great greenish bulk of the
Entity.

But Ketrik didn't see that. He was dragging himself the few remaining
yards to the Vortex machine, then slowly up to the controls. Heedless
now of the frantic light-tendrils that tried to stop him, he managed
to turn on the control. He sank to the floor as he pulled back on the
master lever.

It was through blurring eyes this time that he saw the crazy tilting
of the laboratory dome and everything beneath, saw the dark Vortex
twisting through from an alien space. As though in a dream he saw a
rush of light, glimpsed a greenish mass hurtling outward to disappear
in a convergence of crazy space-angles....

After that he remembered finding his electro which had skidded away on
the floor. He used it to blast the Vortex machine into tangled ruin. He
remembered staggering to the tele-vise and turning it on, and seeing
Praana's face from a screen somewhere in the palace.

"Praana ... the laboratory ... your father is...." But that was all. He
was sliding forward against the screen, sliding down to the floor into
merciful oblivion.

       *       *       *       *       *

He saw her face again and it was no longer startled, it was smiling
down at him. He tried to sit up. A spasm of pain hit him. He heard her
say, "Rest. You will be all right soon."

He was lying on a couch somewhere in the palace. Servants were hovering
around anxiously. Praana sent them away. Presently she said, "I've
contacted the Earth Fleet's flagship. They will be here sometime
tomorrow. They come in peace."

He managed to nod. "You know about the other? Your father--he was...."
He stopped the words in time, his face twisted as he thought of it.

"Don't be afraid to say it." Praana still managed to smile. "Yes, I
know it now, we all know! He was mad. Mars as well as Earth owes you
a debt of gratitude it can never repay." She hesitated. "I want to
forget. I must get away, somewhere far away. I should like to return to
Earth, for just a little while."

Ketrik grinned. He lay back. He had wanted to hear her say that.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Dread-Flame of M'Tonak, by Henry Hasse

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DREAD-FLAME OF M'TONAK ***

***** This file should be named 63897-8.txt or 63897-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/3/8/9/63897/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg EBook of Severn & Somme, by Ivor Gurney

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this ebook.

Title: Severn & Somme

Author: Ivor Gurney

Release Date: November 27, 2020 [EBook #63895]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
             http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
             available at The Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SEVERN & SOMME ***




                            SEVERN & SOMME




                            SEVERN & SOMME

                                  BY

                              IVOR GURNEY

                      Private, of the Gloucesters


                   LONDON: SIDGWICK & JACKSON, LTD.
                  3 ADAM STREET, ADELPHI, W.C.2. 1917

                       _First published in 1917_


                         _All rights reserved_




                                  TO

                             MARGARET HUNT




PREFACE


This book stands dedicated to one only of my friends, but there are many
others to whom I would willingly dedicate singly and in state, if that
did not mean the writing of forty books of verse and dedications--a
terrible thing for all concerned.

So that, under the single name and sign of homage and affection, I would
desire such readers as come to me to add also:

To my father and mother; F. W. Harvey (also a Gloucestershire lad); Miss
Marion Scott, whose criticism has been so useful, and she so kind, in
spite of my continued refusal to alter a word of anything; the Vicar of
Twigworth; Herbert Howells (and this is not the last time you will hear
of him); Mr. Hilaire Belloc, whose “Path to Rome” has been my trench
companion, with “The Spirit of Man”; Mr. Wilfred Gibson, author of
“Friends,” a great little book; many others also, including Shakespeare
and Bach, both friends of mine; and, last but not least, my comrades of
two platoons of the-/-[A] Gloucesters, who so often have wondered
whether I were crazy or not. Let them draw their own conclusions now,
for the writing of this book it was that so distracted me.... This is a
long list, and even now does not include old Mrs. Poyner, who was so
jolly and long-suffering, nor my boat _Dorothy_, now idle in the mud;
though a poet sang of her full of glory at Framilode.

[A] The publication of Battalion Nos. being strictly forbidden by
the Military Authorities, we have to leave the identification of the
platoons referred to by Mr. Gurney to those whom it concerns.--S. & J.,
LTD.

Even as I write the list becomes fuller, farther extended, yet a soldier
must face pain, and so it remains shorter by far than might be.

I fear that those who buy the book (or even borrow), to get information
about the Gloucesters will be disappointed. Most of the book is
concerned with a person named Myself, and the rest with my county,
Gloucester, that whether I die or live stays always with me--being in
itself so beautiful, so full of memories; whose people are so good to be
friends with, so easy-going and so frank.

Some of the afore-mentioned people I have never had good fortune enough
to meet in the flesh, but that was not my fault. I hope they will
forgive my using their names without permission. Ah, would they only
retaliate in kind! That is, however, not likely, as I never was famous,
and a Common Private makes but little show.

All these verses were written in France, and in sound of the guns, save
only two or three earlier pieces. This should be reason enough to excuse
any roughness in the technique. If more reason is required, people of
home, and most of all, people of Gloucester, may well be indulgent to
one who thought of them so often, and whose images of beauty in the mind
were always of Gloucester, county of Cotswold and Severn, and a plain
rich, blossomy, and sweet of airs--as the wise Romans knew, who made
their homes in exile by the brown river, watching the further bank for
signs of war.

                                                           Ivor Gurney.

_Spring_, 1917.




CONTENTS


                                                                    PAGE

TO CERTAIN COMRADES                                                   13

THE FIRE KINDLED                                                      15

TO THE POET BEFORE BATTLE                                             17

MAISEMORE                                                             18

AFTERWARDS                                                            20

CAROL                                                                 21

STRANGE SERVICE                                                       23

SERENITY                                                              25

THE SIGNALLER’S VISION                                                26

THE MOTHER                                                            27

TO ENGLAND--A NOTE                                                    28

BACH AND THE SENTRY                                                   29

LETTERS                                                               30

STRAFE                                                                31

ACQUIESCENCE                                                          32

THE STRONG THING                                                      33

SCOTS                                                                 34

TO AN UNKNOWN LADY                                                    35

SONG AND PAIN                                                         36

PURPLE AND BLACK                                                      37

WEST COUNTRY                                                          38

FIRELIGHT                                                             39

THE ESTAMINET                                                         40

SONG                                                                  42

BALLAD OF THE THREE SPECTRES                                          43

COMMUNION                                                             44

TIME AND THE SOLDIER                                                  45

INFLUENCES                                                            46

AFTER-GLOW                                                            47

HAIL AND FAREWELL                                                     48

PRAISE                                                                49

WINTER BEAUTY                                                         50

SONG OF PAIN AND BEAUTY                                               52

SPRING. ROUEN, MAY 1917                                               53

JUNE--TO--COME                                                        57

“HARK, HARK, THE LARK”                                                59

SONG AT MORNING                                                       60

TREES                                                                 61

REQUIEM                                                               62

REQUIEM                                                               63

REQUIEM                                                               64

SONNETS 1917:

   1. FOR ENGLAND                                                     65

   2. PAIN                                                            66

   3. SERVITUDE                                                       67

   4. HOME-SICKNESS                                                   68

   5. ENGLAND THE MOTHER                                              69




SEVERN AND SOMME




TO CERTAIN COMRADES

(E. S. AND J. H.)


    LIVING we loved you, yet withheld our praises
    Before your faces;

    And though we had your spirits high in honour,
    After the English manner

    We said no word. Yet, as such comrades would,
    You understood.

    Such friendship is not touched by Death’s disaster,
    But stands the faster;

    And all the shocks and trials of time cannot
    Shake it one jot.

    Beside the fire at night some far December,
    We shall remember

    And tell men, unbegotten as yet, the story
    Of your sad glory--

    Of your plain strength, your truth of heart, your splendid
    Coolness, all ended!

    All ended, ... yet the aching hearts of lovers
    Joy overcovers,

    Glad in their sorrow; hoping that if they must
    Come to the dust,

    An ending such as yours may be their portion,
    And great good fortune--

    That if we may not live to serve in peace
    England, watching increase--

    Then death with you, honoured, and swift, and high;
    And so--not die.

    =IN TRENCHES, _July_ 1916=.




THE FIRE KINDLED

    GOD, that I might see
      Framilode once again!
    Redmarley, all renewed,
      Clear shining after rain.

    And Cranham, Cranham trees,
      And blaze of Autumn hues.
    Portway under the moon,
      Silvered with freezing dews.

    May Hill that Gloster dwellers
      ’Gainst every sunset see;
    And the wide Severn river
      Homing again to the sea.

    The star of afterglow,
      Venus, on western hills;
    Dymock in spring: O spring
      Of home! O daffodils!

    And Malvern’s matchless huge
      Bastions of ancient fires--
    These will not let me rest,
      So hot my heart desires....

    Here we go sore of shoulder,
      Sore of foot, by quiet streams;
    But these are not my rivers....
      And these are useless dreams.




TO THE POET BEFORE BATTLE


    NOW, youth, the hour of thy dread passion comes:
    Thy lovely things must all be laid away;
    And thou, as others, must face the riven day
    Unstirred by rattle of the rolling drums,
    Or bugles’ strident cry. When mere noise numbs
    The sense of being, the fear-sick soul doth sway,
    Remember thy great craft’s honour, that they may say
    Nothing in shame of poets. Then the crumbs
    Of praise the little versemen joyed to take
    Shall be forgotten: then they must know we are,
    For all our skill in words, equal in might
    And strong of mettle as those we honoured; make
    The name of poet terrible in just war,
    And like a crown of honour upon the fight.




MAISEMORE


    O WHEN we swung through Maisemore,
      The Maisemore people cheered,
    And women ran from farmyards,
      And men from ricks, afeared

    To lose the sight of soldiers
      Who would, ’fore Christmas Day,
    Blow Kaiser William’s Army
      Like mist of breath away!

    The war it was but young then!
      And we were young, unknowing
    The path we were to tread,
      The way the path was going.

    And not a man of all of us,
      Marching across the bridge,
    Had thought how Home would linger
      In our hearts, as Maisemore Ridge.

    When the darkness downward hovers
      Making trees like German shadows,
    How our souls fly homing, homing
      Times and times to Maisemore meadows,

    By Aubers ridge that Maisemore men
      Have died in vain to hold....
    The burning thought but once desires
      Maisemore in morning gold!

    O when we marched through Maisemore
      Past many a creaking cart,
    We little thought we had in us
      Love so hot at heart.




AFTERWARDS


    THOSE dreadful evidences of Man’s ill-doing
    The kindly Mother of all shall soon hide deep,
    Covering with tender fingers her children asleep,
    Till Time’s slow cycle turns them to renewing
    In other forms their beauty--no grief, no rueing
    Irrevocable woe. They’ll lie, they’ll steep
    Their hearts in peace unfathomed, till they leap
    Quick to the light of the sun, as flowers strewing,
    Maybe, their own friends’ paths. And that’s not all.
    When men who knew them walk old ways alone,
    The paths they loved together, at even-fall,
    The troubled heart shall know a presence near,
    Friendly, familiar, and the old grief gone,
    The new keen joy shall make all darkness clear.




CAROL


    WINTER now has bared the trees,
      Killed with tiny swords the jolly
    Leafage that mid-summer sees,
      But left the ivy and the holly.
          Hold them high
          And make delight
    For Christë’s joy that’s born to-night.

    All green things but these have hid
      Their heads, or died in melancholy,
    Winter’s spite them all has rid
      Save only ivy and brave holly.
          Give them place
          In all men’s sight
    For Christë’s grace that’s born to-night.

    Baby eyes are pleased to see
      Bright red berries and children jolly,
    So shout and dance and sing with glee,
      And honour ivy and prickly holly.
          Honour courage
          And make delight
    For Christë’s sake that’s born to-night.

    Christus natus hodie!
    Drink deep of joy on Christmas Day,
    Join hands and sing a roundelay,
    For this is Christ’s and children’s day,
    Christus natus hodie!
    Hodie!




STRANGE SERVICE


    LITTLE did I dream, England, that you bore me
    Under the Cotswold hills beside the water meadows,
    To do you dreadful service, here, beyond your borders
    And your enfolding seas.

    I was a dreamer ever, and bound to your dear service,
    Meditating deep, I thought on your secret beauty,
    As through a child’s face one may see the clear spirit
    Miraculously shining.

    Your hills not only hills, but friends of mine and kindly,
    Your tiny knolls and orchards hidden beside the river
    Muddy and strongly-flowing, with shy and tiny streamlets
    Safe in its bosom.

    Now these are memories only, and your skies and rushy sky-pools
    Fragile mirrors easily broken by moving airs....
    In my deep heart for ever goes on your daily being,
    And uses consecrate.

    Think on me too, O Mother, who wrest my soul to serve you
    In strange and fearful ways beyond your encircling waters;
    None but you can know my heart, its tears and sacrifice;
    None, but you, repay.




SERENITY


    NOR steel nor flame has any power on me,
    Save that its malice work the Almighty Will,
    Nor steel nor flame has any power on me;
    Through tempests of hell-fire I must go free
    And unafraid; so I remember still
    Nor steel nor flame has any power on me,
    Save that its malice work the Almighty Will.




THE SIGNALLER’S VISION


    ONE rainy winter dusk
      Mending a parted cable,
    Sudden I saw so clear
      Home and the tea-table.

    So clear it was, so sweet,
      I did not start, but drew
    The breath of deep content
      Some minutes ere I knew

    My Mother’s face that’s soother
      Than autumn half-lights kind,
    My softly smiling sisters
      Who keep me still in mind,

    Were but a dream, a vision--
      That faded. And I knew
    The smell of trench, trench-feeling--
      And turned to work anew.




THE MOTHER


    WE scar the earth with dreadful engin’ry;
    She takes us to her bosom at the last;
    Hiding our hate with love, who cannot see
    Of any child the faults; and holds us fast.
    We’ll wait in quiet till our passion’s past.




TO ENGLAND--A NOTE


    I WATCHED the boys of England where they went
    Through mud and water to do appointed things.
    See one a stake, and one wire-netting brings,
    And one comes slowly under a burden bent
    Of ammunition. Though the strength be spent
    They “carry on” under the shadowing wings
    Of Death the ever-present. And hark, one sings
    Although no joy from the grey skies be lent.

    Are these the heroes--these? have kept from you
    The power of primal savagery so long?
    Shall break the devil’s legions? These they are
    Who do in silence what they might boast to do;
    In the height of battle tell the world in song
    How they do hate and fear the face of War.




BACH AND THE SENTRY


    WATCHING the dark my spirit rose in flood
      On that most dearest Prelude of my delight.
    The low-lying mist lifted its hood,
      The October stars showed nobly in clear night.

    When I return, and to real music-making,
      And play that Prelude, how will it happen then?
    Shall I feel as I felt, a sentry hardly waking,
      With a dull sense of No Man’s Land again?




LETTERS


    “MAIL’S UP!” The vast of night is over,
    And love of friends fills all one’s mind.
    (His wife, his sister, or his lover.)
    Mail’s up, the vast of night is over,
    The grey-faced heaven joy does cover
    With love, and God once more seems kind.
    “Mail’s up!” the vast of night is over,
    And love of friends fills all one’s mind.




STRAFE


    THE “crumps” are falling twenty to the minute.
    We crouch, and wait the end of it--or us.
    Just behind the trench, before, and in it,
    The “crumps” are falling twenty to the minute;
    (O Framilode! O Maisemore’s laughing linnet!)
    Here comes a monster like a motor-bus.
    The “crumps” are falling twenty to the minute:
    We crouch and wait the end of it--or us.




ACQUIESCENCE


    SINCE I can neither alter my destiny
    By one hair’s breadth from its appointed course;
    Since bribes nor prayers nor any earthly force
    May from its pathway move a life not free--
    I must gather together the whole strength of me.
    My senses make my willing servitors;
    Cherish and feed the better, starve the worse;
    Turn all my pride to proud humility.
    Meeting the daily shocks and frozen, stony,
    Cynical face of doubt with smiles and joy--
    As a battle with autumn winds delights a boy,
    Before the smut of the world and the lust of money,
    Power, and fame, can yet his youth destroy;
    Ere he has scorned his Father’s patrimony.




THE STRONG THING


    I HAVE seen Death and the faces of men in fear
      Of Death, and shattered, terribly ruined flesh,
    Appalled; but through the horror, coloured and clear
      The love of my county, Gloster, rises afresh.

    And on the Day of Days, the Judgment Day,
      The Word of Doom awaiting breathless and still,
    I’ll marvel how sweet’s the air down Framilode way,
      And take my sentence on sheer-down Crickley Hill.




SCOTS


    THE boys who laughed and jested with me but yesterday,
    So fit for kings to speak to, so blithe and proud and gay ...
    Are now but thoughts of blind pain, and best hid away....
    (Over the top this morning at the dawn’s first grey.)

    O, if we catch the Kaiser his dirty hide to flay,
    We’ll hang him on a tall tree his pride to allay.
    That will not bring the boys again to mountain and brae....
    (Over the top this morning at the dawn’s first grey.)

    To think--earth’s best and dearest turned to red broken clay
    By one devil’s second! What words can we say?
    Or what gift has God their mothers’ anguish to repay?...
    (Over the top this morning at the first flush of day.)




TO AN UNKNOWN LADY


    YOU that were once so sweet, are sweeter now
    That an even leaden greyness clouds my days;
    A pain it is to think on your sweet ways,
    Your careless-tender speaking, tender and low.
    When the hills enclosed us, hid in happy valleys,
    Greeting a thousand times the things most dear,
    We wasted thoughts of love in laughter clear,
    And told our passion out in mirthful sallies.
    But in me now a burning impulse rages
    To praise our love in words like flaming gold,
    Molten and live for ever; not fit for cold
    And coward like-to-passions Time assuages.
    Nor do I fear you are lovely only in dreams,
    Being as the sky reflected in clear streams.




SONG AND PAIN


    OUT of my sorrow have I made these songs,
        Out of my sorrow;
    Though somewhat of the making’s eager pain
        From Joy did borrow.

    Some day, I trust, God’s purpose of Pain for me
        Shall be complete,
    And then--to enter in the House of Joy....
        Prepare, my feet.




PURPLE AND BLACK


    THE death of princes is
      Honoured most greatly,
    Proud kings put purple on
      In manner stately.

    Though they have lived such life
      As God offends,
    Gone fearful down to death,
      Sick, without friends.

    And in the temple dim,
      Trumpets of gold
    Proclaim their glory; so
      Their story is told.

    In sentimental hymns
      Weeping her dolour,
    The mother of heroes wears
      Vile black--Death’s colour,

    Who should walk proudly with
      The noblest one
    Of all that purple throng--
      “This was my son.”




WEST COUNTRY


    SPRING comes soon to Maisemore
      And spring comes sweet,
    With bird-songs and blue skies,
      On gay dancing feet;
    But she is such a shy lady
      I fear we’ll never meet.

    Yet some day round a corner
      Where the hedge foams white,
    I’ll find Spring sleeping
      In the young-crescent night,
    And seize her and make her
      Yield all her delight.

    But yon’s a glad story
      That’s yet to be told.
    Here’s grey winter’s bareness
      And no-shadowed cold.
    O Spring, with your music,
      Your blue, green, and gold,
    Come shame his hard wisdom
      With laughter and gold!




FIRELIGHT


    SILENT, bathed in firelight, in dusky light and gloom
    The boys squeeze together in the smoky dirty room,
    Crowded round the fireplace, a thing of bricks and tin,
    They watch the shifting embers till the good dreams enter in,

    That fill the low hovel with blossoms fresh with dew,
    And blue sky and white clouds that sail the clear air through.
    They talk of daffodillies and the bluebells’ skiey bed,
    Till silence thrills and murmurs at the things they have said.

    And yet, they have no skill of words, whose eyes glow so deep,
    They wait for night and silence and the strange power of sleep,
    To lift them and drift them like sea-birds over the sea
    Where some day I shall walk again, and they walk with me.




THE ESTAMINET


    THE crowd of us were drinking
      One night at Riez Bailleul,
    The glasses were a-clinking,
      The estaminet was full;

    And loud with song and story
      And blue with tales and smoke,--
    We spoke no word of glory,
      Nor mentioned “foreign yoke.”

    But yarns of girls in Blighty;
      Vain, jolly, ugly, fair,
    Standoffish, foolish, flighty--
      And O! that we were there!

    Where never thuds a “Minnie,”
      But Minnie smiles at you
    A-meeting in the spinney,
      With kisses not a few.

    And of an inn that Johnson
      Does keep; the “Rising Sun.”
    His friends him call Jack Johnson,
      He’s Gloster’s only one.

    And talk of poachers’ habits
      (But girls ever and again)
    Of killing weasels, rabbits,
      Stoats, pheasants, never men,

    Although we knew to-morrow
      Must take us to the line,
    In beer hid thought and sorrow,
      In ruddy and white wine.

    When all had finished drinking,
      Though still was clear each head,
    We said no word--went slinking
      Straight homeward (?), into bed (?).

    O never lads were merrier
      Nor straighter nor more fine,
    Though we were only “Terrier”
      And only, “Second Line.”

    O I may get to Blighty,
      Or hell, without a sign
    Of all the love that filled me,
      Leave dumb the love that filled me,
    The flood of love that filled me
      For these dear comrades of mine.




SONG


    ONLY the wanderer
      Knows England’s graces,
    Or can anew see clear
      Familiar faces.

    And who loves joy as he
      That dwells in shadows?
    Do not forget me quite,
      O Severn meadows.




BALLAD OF THE THREE SPECTRES


    AS I went up by Ovillers
      In mud and water cold to the knee,
    There went three jeering, fleering spectres,
      That walked abreast and talked of me.

    The first said, “Here’s a right brave soldier
      That walks the dark unfearingly;
    Soon he’ll come back on a fine stretcher,
      And laughing for a nice Blighty.”

    The second, “Read his face, old comrade,
      No kind of lucky chance I see;
    One day he’ll freeze in mud to the marrow,
      Then look his last on Picardie.”

    Though bitter the word of these first twain
      Curses the third spat venomously;
    “He’ll stay untouched till the war’s last dawning
      Then live one hour of agony.”

    Liars the first two were. Behold me
      At sloping arms by one--two--three;
    Waiting the time I shall discover
      Whether the third spake verity.




COMMUNION


    BEAUTY lies so deep
      On all the fields,
    Nothing for the eyes
      But blessing yields.

    Tall elms, greedy of light,
      Stand tip-toe. See
    The last light linger in
      Their tracery.

    The guns are dumb, are still
      All evil noises.
    The singing heart in peace
      Softly rejoices,

    Only unsatisfied
      With Beauty’s hunger
    And sacramental thirst--
      Nothing of anger.

    Mist wraiths haunt the path
      As daylight lessens,
    The stars grow clearer, and
      My dead friend’s presence.




TIME AND THE SOLDIER


    HOW slow you move, old Time;
      Walk a bit faster!
    Old fool, I’m not your slave....
      Beauty’s my master!

    You hold me for a space....
      What are you, Time?
    A ghost, a thing of thought,
      An easy rhyme.

    Some day I shall again,
      For all your scheming,
    See Severn valley clouds
      Like banners streaming.

    And walk in Cranham lanes,
      By Maisemore go....
    But, fool, decrepit Fool,
      You are SO SLOW!!!




INFLUENCES


    WHEN woods of home grow dark,
      I grow dark too.
    Images of strange power
    Fill me and thrill me that hour,
      Sombre of hue.

    The woods of Dunsinane
      I walk, and know
    What storms did shake Macbeth,
    That brought on Duncan’s death,
      And his own woe.

    Strange whispers chill the blood
      Of evil breath;
    Such rumours as did stir
    Witch and foul sorcerer
      On the lone heath.

    No power have these on me;
      I know too well
    Their weakness to condemn.
    Spring will exorcise them
      With one bluebell.




AFTER-GLOW

[_TO_ F. W. HARVEY]


    OUT of the smoke and dust of the little room
    With tea-talk loud and laughter of happy boys,
    I passed into the dusk. Suddenly the noise
    Ceased with a shock, left me alone in the gloom,
    To wonder at the miracle hanging high
    Tangled in twigs, the silver crescent clear.--
    Time passed from mind. Time died; and then we were
    Once more at home together, you and I.

    The elms with arms of love wrapped us in shade
    Who watched the ecstatic West with one desire,
    One soul uprapt; and still another fire
    Consumed us, and our joy yet greater made:
    That Bach should sing for us, mix us in one
    The joy of firelight and the sunken sun.




HAIL AND FAREWELL


    THE destined bullet wounded him,
      They brought him down to die,
    Far-off a bugle sounded him
      “Retreat,” Good-bye.

    Strange, that from ways so hated,
      And tyranny so hard
    Should come this strangely fated
      And farewell word.

    He thought, “Some Old Sweat might
      Have thrilled at heart to hear,
    Gone down into the night
      Too proud to fear!

    But I--the fool at arms,
      Musician, poet to boot,
    Who hail release; what charms
      In this salute?”

    He smiled--“The latest jest
      That time on me shall play.”
    And watched the dying west,
      Went out with the day.




PRAISE


    O friends of mine, if men mock at my name,
    Say “Children loved him.”
    Since by that word you will have far removed him
    From any bitter shame.




WINTER BEAUTY


    I CANNOT live with Beauty out of mind;
      I seek her and desire her all the day,
    Being the chiefest treasure man may find,
      And word most sweet his eager lips can say.
    She is as strong on me as though I wandered
      In Severn meadows some blue riotous day.

    But since the trees have long since lost their green,
      And I, an exile, can but dream of things
    Grown magic in the mind, I watch the sheen
      Of frost and hear the song Orion sings,
    And hear the star-born passion of Beethoven;
      Man’s consolations sung on the quivering strings.

    Beauty of song remembered, sunset glories,
      Mix in my mind, till I not care nor know
    Whether the stars do move me, golden stories,
      Or ruddy Cotswold in the sunset glow.
    I am uprapt, and not my own, immortal, ...
      In winds of Beauty swinging to and fro.

    Beauty immortal, not to be hid, desire
      Of all men, each in his fashion, give me the strong
    Thirst past satisfaction for thee, and fire
      Not to be quenched.... O lift me, bear me along,
    Touch me, make me worthy that men may seek me
      For Beauty, Mistress Immortal, Healer of Wrong.




SONG OF PAIN AND BEAUTY

[_To_ M. M. S.]


    O MAY these days of pain,
      These wasted-seeming days,
    Somewhere reflower again
      With scent and savour of praise.
    Draw out of memory all bitterness
      Of night with Thy sun’s rays.

    And strengthen Thou in me
      The love of men here found,
    And eager charity,
      That, out of difficult ground,
    Spring like flowers in barren deserts, or
      Like light, or a lovely sound.

    A simpler heart than mine
      Might have seen beauty clear
    Where I could see no sign
      Of Thee, but only fear.
    Strengthen me, make me to see Thy beauty always
      In every happening here.

     IN TRENCHES, _March 1917_.




SPRING. ROUEN, MAY 1917


    I AM dumb, I am dumb!
    And here’s a Norman orchard and here’s Spring
    Goading the sullen words that will not come.
    Romance, beating his distant magical drum,
    Calls to a soldier bearing alien arms,
    “Throw off your yoke and hear my darlings sing,
    Blackbirds” (by red-roofed farms)
    “More drunk than any poet with May’s delight,
    Green alive to the eye, and pink and white.”

    Joy’s there, but not for me;
    And song, but shall I sing
    That live as in a dream of some bad night,
    Whose memories are of such ecstasy
    And height of passionate joy, that pain alone
    Is born of beauty in cloud and flower and tree;
    Yes, and the great Cathedral’s towering stone.

    To me these are but shadows
    Of orchards and old meadows
    Trodden before the dawn,
    Trodden after the dusk....
    All loveliness of France is as a husk,
    The inner living spirit of beauty gone,
    To that familiar beauty now withdrawn
    From exiles hungering ever for the sight
    Of her day-face;
    England’s;
    Or in some orchard space
    Breathless to drink peace from her calm night.

    How shall I sing, since she sings not to me
    Songs any more?
    High rule she holds for ever on the sea
    That’s hers, but dreams too might guard the shore
    Of France, that’s French and set apart for ever.
    A Spirit of Love our link of song does sever.
    Had it been hate
    (The weakest of all sworn enemies of Love)
    We should have broken through or passed above
    Its foolish barriers;
    Here we must bow as to established Fate,
    And reverently; for, comrades and high peers,
    Sisters in blood,
    Our mothers brook no rival in their state
    Of motherhood.

    But not for ever shall our travail last,
    And not for ever we
    Be held by iron Duty over sea.
    The image of evil shall be overcast,
    And all his willing slaves and priests of evil
    Scattered like dust, shall lie upon the plain;
    That image, ground to dust utterly level
    With unregarded weeds and all as vain.
    The oppressed shall lift their hearts up once again,
    And we return....
    Not to scarred lands and homes laid in the dust,
    Not with hard hearts to sights that sear and burn,
    But with assured longing and certain trust,
    To England’s royal grace and dignity,
    To England’s changing skies, rich greenery,
    High strength controlled, queenly serenity,
    Inviolate kept by her confederate sea
    And hearts resolved to every sacrifice.
    We shall come home,
    We shall come home again,
    Living and dead, one huge victorious host--
    The dead that would not leave their comrades till
    The last steep were topped of the difficult hill,
    The last farthing paid of the Great Cost,
    The last thrill suffered of the Great Pain.
    Living and dead, we shall come home at last
    To her sweet breast,
    England’s; by one touch be paid in full
    For all things grey and long and terrible
    Of that dread night which seemed eternity.

    O Mother, shall thy kisses not restore
    Body and life-sick soul? Yes, and set free
    Songs and great floods of lovelier melody
    Than thou didst give
    When we those days of half-awake did live.
    And joy must surely flower again more fair
    To us, who dwelt in shadows and foul air.
    We’ll breathe and drink in song.

    Spring shall blot out all traces of old care;
    Her clouds of green and waves of gold among
    We shall grow free of heart, and great, and young--
    Be made anew in that Great Resurrection,
    Perfect as is the violet’s perfection.
    Perfect as she
    Who sanctifies our memory with sorrow,
    Hugs, as a mother hugs, the thoughts that harrow,
    Watching for dawn, hungering for the morrow
    Lone oversea....

    I am dumb now, dumb,
    But in that time what music shall not come?
    Mother of Beauty, Mistress of the Sea.




JUNE--TO--COME


    WHEN the sun’s fire and gold
      Sets the bee humming,
    I will not write to tell
      Him that I’m coming,

    But ride out unawares
      On that old road,
    Of Minsterworth, of Peace,
      Of Framilode,

    And walk, not looked for, in
      That cool, dark passage.
    Never a single word;
      Myself my message.

    And then; well ... O we’ll drift
      And stand and gaze,
    And wonder how we could
      In those Bad Days

    Live without Minsterworth;
      Or western air
    Fanning the hot cheek,
      Stirring the hair;
    In land where hate of men
      God’s love did cover;
    This land.... And here’s my dream
      Irrevocably over.




“HARK, HARK, THE LARK”


    HARK, hark, the lark to heaven’s gate uprisen,
        Pours out his joy ...
    I think of you, shut in some distant prison,
        O Boy, poor Boy;

    Your heart grown sick with hope deferred and shadows
        Of prison ways;
    Not daring to snatch a thought of Severn meadows,
        Or old blue-days.




SONG AT MORNING


    PRAISE for the day’s magnificent uprising!
    Praise for the cool
    Air and the blue new-old ever-surprising
    Face of the sky, and mirrored blue of the pool.
    Only the fool, bat-witted, owl-eyed fool
    Can hold a deaf ear while life begins
    The actual opening of a myriad stories....
    Blindness, ingratitude, the foolishest sins!
    Now if this day blot out my chief desires,
    And leave me maimed and blind and full of hot
    Surges of insurrection, evil fires,
    Memories of joys that seem better forgot;
    Quiet me then.
    Thy Will is binding on the nearest flower
    As on the farthest star; and what shall put me
    Out of Thy power, or from Thy guidance far,
    Though I in hell of my self-will would shut me?
    But if Thy Will be joy for me to-day,
    Give me clear eyes, a heart open to feel
    Thy influence, Thy kindness: O unseal
    The shut, the hidden places in me, reveal
    Those things most precious secretly hidden away
    From all save children and the simply wise.
    Give me clear eyes!
    And strength to know, whatever may befall,
    The eternal presence of great mysteries,
    Glorifying Thee for all.




TREES

     (“You cannot think how ghastly these battle-fields look under a
     grey sky. Torn trees are the most terrible things I have ever seen.
     Absolute blight and curse is on the face of everything.”)


    THE dead land oppressed me;
      I turned my thoughts away,
    And went where hill and meadow
      Are shadowless and gay.

    Where Coopers stands by Cranham,
      Where the hill-gashes white
    Show golden in the sunshine,
      Our sunshine--God’s delight.

    Beauty my feet stayed at last
      Where green was most cool,
    Trees worthy of all worship
      I worshipped ... then, O fool,

    Let my thoughts slide unwitting
      To other, dreadful trees, ...
    And found me standing, staring
      Sick of heart--at these!




REQUIEM


    POUR out your light, O stars, and do not hold
      Your loveliest shining from earth’s outworn shell--
    Pure and cold your radiance, pure and cold
      My dead friend’s face as well.




REQUIEM


    NOR grief nor tears should wrong the silent dead
      Save England’s, for her children fallen so far
    From her eager care; though by God’s justice led
      And fallen in such a war.




REQUIEM


    POUR out your bounty, moon of radiant shining
      On all this shattered flesh, these quiet forms;
    For these were slain, so strangely still reclining,
      In the noblest cause was ever waged with arms.




SONNETS 1917

[_TO_ THE MEMORY OF RUPERT BROOKE]




1. FOR ENGLAND

    THOUGH heaven be packed with joy-bewildering
    Pleasures of soul and heart and mind, yet who
    Would willingly let slip, freely let go
    Earth’s mortal loveliness; go wandering
    Where never the late bird is heard to sing,
    Nor full-sailed cloud-galleons wander slow;
    No pathways in the woods; no afterglow,
    When the air’s fire and magic with sense of spring?

    So the dark horror clouds us, and the dread
    Of the unknown.... But if it must be, then
    What better passing than to go out like men
    For England, giving all in one white glow?
    Whose bodies shall lie in earth as on a bed,
    And as the Will directs our spirits may go




2. PAIN

    PAIN, pain continual; pain unending;
    Hard even to the roughest, but to those
    Hungry for beauty.... Not the wisest knows,
    Nor most pitiful-hearted, what the wending
    Of one hour’s way meant. Grey monotony lending
    Weight to the grey skies, grey mud where goes
    An army of grey bedrenched scarecrows in rows
    Careless at last of cruellest Fate-sending.
    Seeing the pitiful eyes of men foredone,
    Or horses shot, too tired merely to stir,
    Dying in shell-holes both, slain by the mud.
    Men broken, shrieking even to hear a gun.--
    Till pain grinds down, or lethargy numbs her,
    The amazed heart cries angrily out on God.




3. SERVITUDE

    IF it were not for England, who would bear
    This heavy servitude one moment more?
    To keep a brothel, sweep and wash the floor
    Of filthiest hovels were noble to compare
    With this brass-cleaning life. Now here, now there
    Harried in foolishness, scanned curiously o’er
    By fools made brazen by conceit, and store
    Of antique witticisms thin and bare.

    Only the love of comrades sweetens all,
    Whose laughing spirit will not be outdone.
    As night-watching men wait for the sun
    To hearten them, so wait I on such boys
    As neither brass nor Hell-fire may appal,
    Nor guns, nor sergeant-major’s bluster and noise.




4. HOME-SICKNESS

    WHEN we go wandering the wide air’s blue spaces,
    Bare, unhappy, exiled souls of men;
    How will our thoughts over and over again
    Return to Earth’s familiar lovely places,
    Where light with shadow ever interlaces--
    No blanks of blue, nor ways beyond man’s ken--
    Where birds are, and flowers, as violet, and wren,
    Blackbird, bluebell, hedge-sparrow, tiny daisies.

    O tiny things, but very stuff of soul
    To us ... so frail.... Remember what we are;
    Set us not on some strange outlandish star,
    But one caring for Love. Give us a Home.
    There we may wait while the long ages roll
    Content, unfrightened by vast Time-to-come.




5. ENGLAND THE MOTHER

    WE have done our utmost, England, terrible
    And dear taskmistress, darling Mother and stern.
    The unnoticed nations praise us, but we turn
    Firstly, only to thee--“Have we done well?
    Say, are you pleased?”--and watch your eyes that tell
    To us all secrets, eyes sea-deep that burn
    With love so long denied; with tears discern
    The scars and haggard look of all that hell.

    Thy love, thy love shall cherish, make us whole,
    Whereto the power of Death’s destruction is weak.
    Death impotent, by boys bemocked at, who
    Will leave unblotted in the soldier-soul
    Gold of the daffodil, the sunset streak,
    The innocence and joy of England’s blue.

                                THE END


                              PRINTED BY
                    HAZELL, WATSON AND VINEY, LD.,
                         LONDON AND AYLESBURY.

                   *       *       *       *       *

              _From Sidgwick & Jackson’s List of Poetry_


     =ASQUITH, HERBERT. The Volunteer and other Poems.= _Second Edition,
     with new Poems added._ =2s.= net.

     =BROOKE, RUPERT. Poems.= (_First issued 1911._) _Nineteenth
     Impression._ =2s. 6d.= net.

    ---- =1914 and other Poems.= With a Portrait. _Twenty-first
     Impression._ =2s. 6d.= net.

    ---- =Selected Poems.= With a new Portrait. _Second Impression._
     Cloth, =3s. 6d.= net; lambskin, =5s.= net.

     =DRINKWATER, JOHN. Swords and Ploughshares.= _Second Impression._ =2s.
     6d.= net.

    ---- =Olton Pools.= _Second Impression._ =2s. 6d.= net.

    ---- =Pawns; Three Poetic Plays. 2s. 6d.= net.

    ---- =Poems, 1908-1914. 5s.= net.

     =ENSOR, R. C. K. Odes and other Poems. 2s.= net.

     =GARSTIN, CROSBIE. Vagabond Verses.= Cloth, =2s. 6d.= net.

     =GRAVES, C. L. War’s Surprises, and other Verses.= Cloth, =3s. 6d.=
     net.

    [_Second Impression._

     =HARVEY, F. W. A Gloucestershire Lad.= _Fourth Impression._ Cloth,
     =2s.= net; paper =1s. 6d.= net.

    ---- =Gloucestershire Friends.= Poems from a German Prison Camp. =2s.
     6d.= net.

     =JENKINS, ELINOR. Poems. 2s. 6d.= net.

     =MACAULAY, ROSE. The Two Blind Countries.= Cloth, =2s. 6d.= net.

     =NIVEN, FREDERICK. Maple-leaf Songs.= Wrappers. =1s.= net.

     =OWEN, EVERARD. Three Hills and other Poems.= _Second Impression._
     Wrappers, =6d.= net.

     =SHAKESPEARE, W. G. Ypres and other Poems.= Boards, =2s.= net.

     =SHANKS, EDWARD. Poems. 2s. 6d.= net.

     “=SOME VERSE.=” =By F. S.= _Third Impression._ Boards, =2s.= net.

     =SONGS OF THE “BLUE DRAGON.”= Cloth, =1s. 6d.= net; wrappers, =1s.= net.

     =TURNER, W. J. The Hunter and other Poems.= Cloth, =2s. 6d.= net.

     =TYNAN, KATHARINE. Flower of Youth.= _Second Impression._ =3s. 6d.=
     net.

    ---- =The Holy War. 3s. 6d.= net.

    ---- =Late Songs. 3s. 6d.= net.

     =YORKSHIRE DIALECT POEMS (1673-1915).= _Compiled with an Introduction
     by Prof. F. W. Moorman. Second Edition._ Cloth, =2s.= net; paper, =1s.=
     net.

     An anthology of the best poems in “broad Yorkshire.”

_Complete List of Poetry and other Catalogues on application._


SIDGWICK & JACKSON, Ltd., 3 Adam Street, Adelphi, London, W.C.2

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SEVERN & SOMME ***

***** This file should be named 63895-0.txt or 63895-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
    http://www.gutenberg.org/6/3/8/9/63895/

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org 

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary 
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg eBook, Four Pilgrims, by William Boulting


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions 
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.




Title: Four Pilgrims


Author: William Boulting



Release Date: November 27, 2020  [eBook #63894]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FOUR PILGRIMS***


E-text prepared by Turgut Dincer and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team (http://www.pgdp.net) from page images generously made available by
Internet Archive (https://archive.org)



Note: Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive. See
      https://archive.org/details/fourpilgrims00bouliala





FOUR PILGRIMS

by

WILLIAM BOULTING

Author of
_Giordano Bruno: his Life, Thought, and Martyrdom_;
_Woman in Italy, 1100–1600 A.D._, etc.






London:
Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner & Co., Ltd.,
New York: E. P. Dutton & Co.




ERRATA.


Page 84, Line 2. For “a little before” read “some time after.”




CONTENTS


  I: HIUEN-TSIANG

  _Master of the Law; and his Perilous Journey to the Sacred
  Land of Buddha_, A.D. 627–643.

  CHAP.                                              PAGE

    I. THE ISOLATION OF CHINA                           1

   II. BUDDHA AND BUDDHISM                              5

  III. AN ADVENTUROUS JOURNEY                           9

   IV. THROUGH INDIA IN THE SEVENTH CENTURY            27

    V. INDIAN SOCIAL LIFE IN THE SEVENTH
         CENTURY                                       47

   VI. THE JOURNEY HOME BY A NEW AND
         PERILOUS ROUTE                                55

  VII. PEACEFUL DAYS                                   61


  II: SÆWULF, AN ENGLISH PILGRIM TO
  PALESTINE

    I. EARLY PILGRIMAGE TO PALESTINE                   65

   II. “DIEU LE VEULT”                                 68

  III. SÆWULF’S RECORD                                 72


  III: MOHAMMED IBN ABD ALLAH,

  _Better known as Ibn Batûta, the Greatest of Moslem
  Travellers_, A.D. 1304–77.

     I. THE WHIRLWIND FROM ARABIA AND WHAT
          FOLLOWED                                     89

    II. A RESOLUTE PILGRIM                             96

   III. A ROUNDABOUT PILGRIMAGE                       104

    IV. GLIMPSES OF ARABIA, PERSIA AND EAST
          AFRICA IN THE FOURTEENTH CENTURY            109

     V. TO INDIA BY WAY OF CONSTANTINOPLE AND
          THE STEPPES                                 117

    VI. AN EASTERN DESPOT                             128

   VII. PERILS BY LAND AND SEA                        137

  VIII. OFF TO MALAYSIA AND CATHAY                    147

    IX. MOORS OF SPAIN AND NEGROES OF TIMBUKTU        158


  IV: LUDOVICO VARTHEMA OF BOLOGNA,

  _Renegade Pilgrim to Mecca, Foremost of Italian Travellers_.

     I. THE GREAT AGE OF THE RENAISSANCE AND
          OF DISCOVERY                                163

    II. FROM VENICE TO DAMASCUS                       165

   III. OVER THE DESERT TO MECCA                      172

    IV. THE ESCAPE FROM THE CARAVAN                   186

     V. CERTAIN ADVENTURES IN ARABIA THE HAPPY        190

    VI. EASTWARD HO!                                  200

   VII. THE PAGANS OF NARSINGA                        208

  VIII. FARTHER INDIA, MALAYSIA AND THE BANDA
          ISLANDS                                     221

    IX. SOME CUNNING MANOEUVRES                       235

     X. WAR BY LAND AND SEA                           244

    XI. THE NEW WAY ROUND THE CAPE                    249




PREFACE


Pilgrimage has been popular in all countries and at all times. For what
could be happier than an agreeable change which should contribute at
once to welfare of soul, refreshment of spirit, and vigour of body?
Adventures on the way gave zest to the enterprise. If the more timid
or feeble were content to visit neighbouring shrines, those of hardier
mould, like the Wife of Bath, took more formidable journeys.

  “Thries hadde she been at Jerusalem;
   She hadde passed many a straunge strem;
   At Rome she hadde been, and at Boloigne,
   In Galice at Seint Jame, and at Coloigne,
   She koude muchel of wandrynge by the weye.”

Some of the boldest and bravest of ancient travellers were pilgrims,
and we have their records of wide wandering. But their style is
archaic, has at best little purely literary merit, and is usually
forbidding. They are little known, except to the special student.

The footprints then are scanty, and all the worse for time, which
testify to ardent spirits that once inhabited the warm vesture of
flesh, but have long, long ago been laid to rest. I have tried to
set forth certain of these dead and half-forgotten worthies as with
“organs, dimensions, senses, affections, passions,” even as we. Four
have been chosen. Three of these were shrewd, fearless, observant
men, who overcame surpassing obstacles and met with adventure almost
unparalleled. The first of my bundle of four was a Chinaman, a Buddhist
monk of the early Seventh Century, who started alone on an almost
impossible quest. My second was an Englishman of the earliest years
of the Twelfth Century, who gives us some notion of what the ordinary
palmer was like who got to Jerusalem,

                  “e qui devoto
  Il gran sepolchro adora e scioglie il voto”

(“and venerates the Holy Sepulchre and discharges his vow”). My third
was a Mohammedan, who, in the first half of the Fourteenth Century,
made several pilgrimages to Mecca and ran over the world from Tangier
to Pekin and from Turkestan to Timbuktu. My fourth was a very son of
the glowing age of Julius II, the first European Christian on record
to reach Mecca, one who outstripped the Portuguese in reaching the
aromatic islands of the Banda Sea. In each case, there is a brief
historical foreword to give the pilgrim due introduction into his
proper setting.

  WILLIAM BOULTING.




I.—HIUEN-TSIANG.

MASTER OF THE LAW; AND HIS PERILOUS JOURNEY TO THE SACRED LAND OF
BUDDHA, A.D. 627–643.




CHAPTER I. THE ISOLATION OF CHINA


For thousands of years China was a world to itself, cut off from the
races of men. The main causes of this singular seclusion are simple:—

China was protected from serious invasion by her geographical position.
Northward, it was no easy business for the barbarous intruder to find a
way into China from the Manchurian plain, or for a Chinaman to find a
way out; and it was still more difficult to effect a passage by force.
To the North-West rose the forbidding walls of the Altai Mountains;
and, between them and China, a broad and demon-haunted waste of sand
blocked the way. Westward, huge interlocked ranges of Central Asia—the
Thian Shan and Pamirs—mountains which o’er top Alp or Caucasus, which
rival the loftiest Andes, and which are inferior only to Himalaya,
presented perils in abundance. These difficulties surmounted, the
vast, trackless sands of Gobi formed a second barrier; and the steep
rocks of Ala-Shan and In-Shan were a third. To the South-West rose the
plateau of Thibet, interlocking with the Pamirs—a plateau with a mean
level of more than 12,000 feet, terminating southward in Himalaya, that
highest and broadest of mountain-walls. To the South of China were the
dense forests, deep valleys, and rapid rivers of Burma and Tonquin.
Eastward the Celestial Empire was guarded by the sea: to reach China
from India was a long and perilous voyage; and the boldest navigator
might hesitate to entrust his clumsy craft to the caprice of the Indian
Ocean, to thread his way through the tortuous straits of Malaysia, and
to chance an encounter with the fierce islanders who lined them, only
in the end to reach a jealous shore. The unwieldly Chinese junk—a
town afloat—did, however, make a periodic and prolonged voyage—at
least in later days—to India; and a few bands of bold, hardy traders
were wont to cross over the formidable passes of Central Asia on
horses, mules, or asses, and to traverse vast, trackless wastes on
camels. They exchanged the products of India, Persia, and those States
which were watered by the classic streams of Oxus and Jaxartes, for the
silks and manufactures of Cathay. Chinese porcelain has been found in
Egyptian tombs.

China enjoyed a soil so productive of every kind of wealth that she was
independent of commercial intercourse with other lands. Secure from all
invaders but the scattered hordes of Mongolia, she developed a high and
distinctive civilization, which became more and more fixed and rigid,
but was superior in many respects to that of other Eastern States. By
the Seventh Century of our Era, good roads, good inns, and an admirable
system of canals rendered internal communication easy; the heavens had
been surveyed by astronomical instruments of some precision; and the
art of printing, which had not then been discovered long, was in use;
although to this day the Chinese do without the valuable economy of an
alphabet.

Moreover the Chinese People preferred to be undisturbed by stimulus
from without. Yet China transmitted her culture to her near and less
civilized neighbours—Japan and the Indo-Chinese peninsula—and claimed
a precarious overlordship of semi-barbarous Manchuria, Mongolia,
Eastern Turkestan and Thibet. During a long stretch of time, the
powerful and jealous Persian Empire was a bar to intercourse with the
far West; because it tried to preserve a monopoly of its own products.

The records of early intercourse with other countries are few; and
those few are meagre. Thirteen centuries before the age in which
Hiuen-Tsiang lived, Embassies from distant nations would seem to
have reached China. Marcus Aurelius despatched a mission (A.D. 166)
to establish direct relations; it travelled by way of India; and
failed. Carus sent another (A.D. 284). At the close of the fourth
century, Ammianus Marcellinus knew of the Chinese as a people dwelling
on fertile plains enclosed by protecting mountains: “a frugal folk,
studying to live peacefully and shunning intercourse with the rest of
mankind.” Half a century later, Moses the Armenian spoke of them as
“dwelling in wealth and civility at the end of the earth; a people
worthy to be called not merely the friends of peace but of life.”
Until the Great Age of Discovery arrived as a novel development of the
Great Age of the Renaissance to derange and remodel the earth, Cathay
was little more than a name to European ears: before the Nineteenth
Century, the Celestial Empire remained undisturbed by the Modern World.

Although the Chinese Government was always persistently obstructive to
foreign intercourse, it took an interest in foreign religions. This
seeming paradox was due to the fact that Confucianism, the official
Faith, was essentially a body of moral precepts, as was Taoism, (albeit
Taoism had stronger pretension to metaphysic), and both people and
rulers were eager to receive any moral doctrine which might strengthen
that love of peace and orderly conduct which would seem to be inborn
in the Chinese breast. There was no _odium theologicum_ in China. Now,
Buddhism was essentially an ethical system, and had much in common with
Taoism. On the whole, the Chinese were eager to adopt it; especially
as becoming a good Buddhist did not disallow of one’s remaining a good
Confucian, or of reconciling Buddhistic and Taoistic speculation. The
Chinese government naturally sanctioned a creed fitted to keep a people
quiet and submissive; and Buddhism proved to be peculiarly suited to
the Chinese mind: it touched the Chinese heart and left a profound
effect on Chinese character.

It had to compete with other religions. For with the caravan of the
trader came many religious Zealots, such as the Fire-Worshippers of
Persia. At the very beginning of Mohammedanism, Wahd-Abi-Kabha, the
maternal uncle of the Prophet, reached China, bearing presents to the
Emperor; and Mohammedans were to be found there in the third decade
of Hiuen-Tsiang’s life; while, in the following decade, Nestorian
missionaries introduced Christianity, which, after due examination, an
Imperial Decree declared to be a satisfactory and permissible faith.
Buddhist missionaries carried the teaching of Gautama to China at a
period not yet ascertained; but it must have lost much of its early
purity by whatever time that may have been.




CHAPTER II.

BUDDHA AND BUDDHISM.


Gautama was the son of a petty chieftain, who exercised limited
authority in a district which lay north of Faîzâbâd. He lived about 600
years before the beginning of the Christian era—about the time when
Jerusalem fell to Nebuchadnezzar and Assyria to the Medes. The evils of
disease, old age, and death weighed on the melancholy mind of the young
princelet: he sought for some way of escape from the curse of craving
flesh and the wild delirium of desire. He abandoned wife and family;
and dwelt, at first, in the solitude of a jungle. At this time, his
life was one of pure contemplation. Then a wave of love for humanity
and profound grief at human suffering swept over him. He resumed the
active life, preaching a pure religion of duty and affection along the
valley of the Ganges; for his soul, like the soul of Plato’s poet, “was
no longer within him.” He had learned and he taught that the misery of
Being is mitigated by strict obedience to the Law of human kindness and
duty. He made stirring appeals to heart and conscience, and supported
his mission by the ancient doctrine of Kharma, which Brâhmans had
taught him—the doctrine that the action of the evil will, barren as
its fruits invariably prove for the living agent, is delayed, but not
destroyed, by death, and builds up a new body and mind, which reap the
bitter harvest of former transgression and also the weal which results
from former well-doing. The heart achieves blessedness in proportion
to its purification; a good life acquires merit, by means of which
relative freedom is obtained from the mournful, malevolent turnings
of the “wheel of things.” Completely purified, Nirvâna (which is
sometimes interpreted as nescience, sometimes as the supra-conscious),
peace in the very heart of things, is obtained. All men may be touched
by love; but only rare intelligencies will seek Nirvâna. For the way
to the Blessed Life is steep and beset with thorns; but the resolute
spirit may achieve increasing and even perfect tranquillity by
uprooting every germ of ill-will and trampling down every one of those
passions of mind or body the results of which are as futile as their
origin is senseless. Gautama accepted the institution of the cloister
then, for such men of high intelligence as sought the truly spiritual.
In time Buddhistic monasticism became divided into the system of the
“Lesser Vehicle”—an ascetic scheme of discipline,—and that of the
“Greater Vehicle” for richer and more metaphysical minds. The first
aimed at restraint; the second, at contemplation. Buddha had no regard
for caste; and this brought his teaching into conflict with that of
the Brâhmans; he promised no endless personal life in heaven—only
progressive release from the evils of temporal existence; he did not
interfere with the popular worship of gods. His doctrine was an appeal
to our more spiritual nature, and closely resembles the Sermon on the
Mount. It awakened a people bound by a system of lifeless forms framed
by a priestly caste, yet who were all athirst for living waters.

But Buddhism speedily became metaphysical in the metaphysical East.
Some of the convents grew into abodes of speculation and seminaries of
learning. It was held that Gautama was the latest of those Buddhas,
those “redeemers” of the world, into whose mother’s womb Bôdhisattva,
the spirit about to become a Buddha, descended spiritually. Yet the
purest teaching of the Spirit contains within itself the seeds of its
own decay: the germ of fulfilment is also the germ of dissolution.
The history of Buddhism strikingly illustrates the truth of this, its
own tenet. Before long the new Faith, like unto Brâhmanism, became
half-throttled by formalism and encrusted by all manner of ridiculous
legend and vulgar superstition. And Asôka, who usurped a throne and
established an Empire at Magadha, near Behar (in the 3rd century before
Christ?) embodied the ethics of Buddhism in formal ordinances. The
letter and not the spirit, of the Law prevailed. But Asôka sent forth
missionaries, East and West and North and South, and they reached far
distant lands.

Probably imperfect and infrequent relations between Chinese Buddhists
and Indian priests were maintained through the medium of caravans
of trade. These have left no record; but in A.D. 65, the Chinese
Authorities sent envoys to Sind by the long, painful, and perilous
overland route. They returned with an Indian priest, sacred writings,
and sacred images of Buddha. After this, an occasional embassy from
India arrived; but such missions soon came to an end, although a
little intercourse was kept up with Ceylon by means of an arduous and
dangerous voyage. Not until the fourth century were Chinamen allowed
to become Buddhist priests. Then, at once, monasteries sprang up all
over the country. About the year 400 Fa-Hian and others with him were
sent on an embassy to secure religious writings. They made their
difficult way through Central Asia. Fa-Hian alone returned, after 14
years absence, by way of Ceylon, bearing authentic scripture with him.
A hundred years later Sung-Yun became a pilgrim to the same end and
was successful in securing a hundred and seventy volumes. Gautama,
like Jesus, had taught by word of mouth only. His manner was to utter
some pithy precept, and then to develop it in a running commentary.
But his disciples recorded these precious words; and, from time to
time, expositions and doctrinal developments and marvellous fables
were added. Of these, the earlier were written in Pali; the later
in Sanskrit, even then a dead tongue, knowledge of which was the
privilege of a small learned class. These Buddhistic writings, made on
prepared palm-leaves, were regarded by the faithful with superstitious
reverence; and Chinese Buddhists were anxious to obtain complete and
accurate copies of them, as well as sacred images and relics of Buddha,
which might serve as the objects of deep veneration.

At no period has the disordered tragedy of human history been more
cataclysmic than in the early part of the Seventh Century after Christ.
The whole world was then a theatre of wild unrest and stupendous
change, little as one fragment of the human race might know of aught
but its own disasters or triumphs. The shattered edifice of the
Roman Empire of the West was run over by Lombard, Frank and Goth and
races still more barbarous than these. From Cheviot to Illyricum,
all was confused, bloody, and unceasing riot. The exceptional vigour
of Heraclius alone saved the Roman Empire of the East from the
ever-watchful and now advancing hosts of Persia; while a new and
wholly unexpected menace arose in the Arabian desert: there a peril
burst forth as abrupt, fierce and overwhelming as a sandstorm of that
rocky waste. For Mohammed and his followers advanced thence with fiery
and resistless speed to offer the nations choice between the Koran,
tribute, and the sword. Even distant, tranquil China, the land cut off
from the rest of mankind was parturient: the Empire had broken up, and
was contended for by vulturine feudatories, who fought together for
sole possession of its bleeding carcase. A new and strong dynasty arose
amid slaughter and desolation. But, for a time, Central China was hell
let loose. The adolescence of Hiuen-Tsiang was passed amid scenes of
death and dismay.




CHAPTER III.

AN ADVENTUROUS JOURNEY.


This boldest of pilgrims, greatest of Chinese travellers came into the
world A.D. 603—nearly twelve hundred years after the founder of his
faith. He was the fourth son of a Chinese Professor in the Province
of Ho-nan, in Central China. Probably he shewed mental ability and a
devotional spirit early; for the second of his elder brethren took him
into his own monastery at Lo-Yang, the Eastern Capital, to supervise
his education. The boy is said to have evinced such brilliant parts and
such a spiritual mind that he became a novice at what would seem, at
that time, to have been the exceptionally early age of thirteen years;
although, two centuries before, Fa-Hian was a novice at three! It was
soon after this event that revolution shook the ancient Empire, and
came near to disrupt it. China became a slaughter-house, and Buddhist
priests were murdered as well as Government Officials.

As certain saints bear witness, the passion that wings its flight
towards no earthly home is occasionally combined with bold and
efficient direction of mundane life. It was so combined in
Hiuen-Tsiang. The monk of perfervid faith gave early proof that he was
a lad of mettle as well as an enthusiast for the Greater Vehicle. In
resolution and spirit, he dominated his elder brother, and insisted on
their both setting off, in the teeth of peril, for a safer place in the
Eastern province of Sz-chuen; and here he ended his novitiate and was
fully ordained at the age of twenty.

At last, chaos within the Chinese frontier and warfare along it began
to yield to the military genius and state-craft of T’ai-Tsung, the
greatest of Chinese warriors and rulers. Hiuen-Tsiang was not slow
to avail himself of the return of some measure of tranquillity to
the State. He disobeyed monastic authority, joined a band of nomadic
traders, and visited convent after convent of the wide Empire, with the
purpose of clearing his mind, in debate with their inmates, concerning
difficult problems in scriptural scholarship and the precise import
of certain tenets of his faith. There was full scope for speculative
discussion, since Chinese Buddhists did not yet possess a complete set
of the Sacred Writings or of the Buddhist Fathers and workers in that
kind of suggestive fiction which is so often taken to be veritable
history and which becomes the wardrobe of moral truth. Much was, as
yet, unsettled by authority and lay open to dispute.

Dissatisfied by the indefinite results of controversy, and fired by
the records of previous pilgrims, the young monk resolved to make for
the cradle and sanctuary of Buddhism and to seek there for the books
which his countrymen lacked. He and a few ardent monks applied to
the newly-established Emperor for permission to do this. The monarch
was Kao-T’sou, first of the T’ang dynasty—that most famous of the
many Imperial lines of China—the glory of having founded which
rests with his son, the redoubtable T’ai-Tsung, whom, later on, we
shall find seated on his father’s throne. The request was made at
an inopportune time, and was refused. For monkdom did not stand in
court-favour just then; monks were ordered to marry; possibly, because
recent internecine strife had thinned the population; possibly, also,
because the new government was jealous, in a perilous time, of the
power of growing sacerdotalism. This prohibition put an end to the
hope of Hiuen-Tsiang’s coadjutors: it only increased his own ardour
and hardened his own resolve. He was now 24 years of age; therefore in
the full vigour of early manhood; he cared nothing for obedience to
constituted authority when constituted authority stood in the way of
spiritual enlightenment. And he was not merely filled with religious
enthusiasm: the restless force and curiosity of youth were his; there
were shrewd, observant eyes in his head as well as disciplined wits.
Here was a man anxious and fitted to observe the physical features,
governments, productions, and peculiarities of unknown countries and to
record them. Westward, beyond the setting sun, lay mysterious lands,
vague as a dream, yet to be found a reality in this so wondrous world.
There was a call from afar. When the spirit of one born for action is
all a fire with enthusiasm begotten of idea, let the world keep watch!

It would appear from Tao-Sun, a Chinese author contemporary with
Hiuen-Tsiang, that there were three routes from China to India—the
one which our traveller took; the one by which he returned; and a
third from Lake Lob-nor, over the thousand miles of terrible plateau
in Thibet and the Himalayas to Nepal. Before long Hiuen Tsiang was
at Liang-chau, the capital of the province of Lan-su, far beyond the
upper reaches of the great Yellow River, and nearly at the extreme
north-western limit of China Proper. Here were gathered merchants
from Thibet and other far-distant lands; and these were so impressed
by Hiuen-Tsiang’s fervour and the grandeur of his project that they
are said to have cast themselves at his feet. They provided him with
ample means to go on. Now, Chinese administration in the province of
Lan-su had only been established recently, and remained insecure; no
inhabitant was allowed to cross the frontier; and the Governor was
a strong man who rigorously enforced his regulations. But what are
the strongest bonds of any mere narrow national group against the
conflicting obligation of Moral or Ideal impulse? How can usage and
prescription and enactment prevail against more spiritual forces?
Our would-be pilgrim secured the aid of a friendly monk, and stole
out of the city by night, accompanied by two young novices. The trio
stealthily, yet rapidly, pursued their course each night; they crept
furtively into some hiding place before each dawn. By the time this
evasive noctambulation had brought them to Kwa-chau, more than a
hundred miles north-east of Liang-chau, Hiuen-Tsiang’s horse was dead.
There was small comfort in learning that he would have to cross a river
so turbulent that no boat could live on it; that, beyond the river,
was an entrenchment which he must contrive to get over; and that, even
should he overcome this obstacle, the frontier was closed by rings of
forts; beyond the forts there was a vast stretch of herbless, waterless
waste; and beyond this desert lay the land of a Turkish people—those
Uïghurs, who appear in European folk-lore as the terrible Ogres.

His heart sank within him; the melancholy which seized him lasted a
whole month, and his taciturnity made it apparent. The Imperial Veto
arrived at Kwa-chau; the Governor of the city sent him a summons to
appear. But this new blow roused his failing courage; he pulled himself
together; personality and enthusiasm prevailed at the interview; the
Governor was won over; Authority gave the pilgrim a hint to lose no
time in making off; and closed its official eye to his departure.

Now, one of the novices was faint-hearted; the other sickly.
Hiuen-Tsiang sent them back. He was anxious to get on his solitary way
as fast as he could; so he bought a new horse; but he lacked a guide.
By a lucky accident he fell in with a “barbarian,” who expressed a
desire to become a monk, and who offered to guide him past the five
successive forts which lay ahead, and which he must somehow contrive to
dodge. The “barbarian” also took him to see an ancient trader who had
been to the land of the Uïghurs over thirty times. This old gentleman
made no attempt at reassuring him. “The routes of the West are rough
and dangerous,” he said, “now, one is stopped by shifting sands; now,
by demons and scorching winds. Even big caravans are liable to lose
their way and come to a miserable end. How, then, can you hope to
make the journey all by yourself? Be wise, I entreat you, and do not
play with your life.” But the monk answered that he held his life as
nothing when set against his holy quest. The old trader then dropped
vain arguments and proposed a deal which should be mutually profitable:
he would take the horse which Hiuen-Tsiang had bought, and would
give him his own Rosinante, which had made the journey so often, and
therefore must remember the road. The pilgrim, when he saw the beast,
recalled how one skilled in occult science had once spoken to him of an
ancient steed, reddish of colour, with a varnished saddle and an iron
framework to it; and lo! was not the very steed before him? He closed
the bargain; and he and the barbarian set forth together, each on his
“mount.”

The twain came up to the river (the Bulunghir) and found a place where
there were narrows. The guide proved himself to be resourceful: he made
a sort of bridge of boughs, covered them with sand, and belaboured the
horses until they dashed across the frail structure. A strange way of
crossing an unfordable stream! but by no means so improbable as it
sounds. It is said to be still used in Central Asia.

Night drew on. Both men were weary, and spread their mats for sleep.
But Hiuen-Tsiang placed small confidence in his guide. They lay fifty
paces apart. And, before long, our hero heard a stealthy footfall and
saw the dim outline of the half-savage stalking up to him. With drawn
sword, too! He sprang up, and breathed a prayer; whereupon the guide
returned to his own mat, stretched himself out, and straightway fell
asleep. Had he meant evil? or did he wish to make off if he found the
pilgrim asleep? or was his desire to frighten him from pursuing a
journey so perilous to them both?

Next morning, being already within the verge of the desert, they ate
sparingly, but were lucky enough to find water. No more water would
be found until they reached close up to the first fort; and they must
steal this by night; for, once espied by the garrison, they might
count themselves dead men. The guide tried to work on our pilgrim to
give up such a mad enterprise. But Hiuen-Tsiang knew no shadow of
turning; so the twain, ears and eyes wide open, wormed they way over
the rough tackless waste. Suddenly the guide tightened his bow and bade
Hiuen-Tsiang go on in front. Our pilgrim was far too wary a person to
do anything of the kind; he was by no means satisfied as to the designs
of the half-civilized stranger. However, the barbarian quietly resumed
his duty as scout; but he displayed such a desire to be out of it all,
and his fears were so obviously growing, that Hiuen-Tsiang dismissed
him with a present of the horse he rode.

Behold our traveller, then, solitary on the unending, pathless desert
of Gobi—one of the most immense of Earth’s waste places,—eagerly
on the look out for such heaps of bleached bones as might mark the
track of some caravan. After some time of slow, painful progress,
he beheld a band of men wearing glittering armour and bearing their
banners unfurled; they were making for him, but vanished as suddenly as
they appeared. It was the mirage come to perplex and delude him. One
illusion followed another in rapid succession; fleeting, dissolving
scenes which were the works of the Devil. But a voice said to him:
“Fear not.” This brought comfort, and his fear departed. He pushed on,
and in the end he sighted the watch-tower. He hid in a sand-hollow
until night closed round, and then he crept up to the wall of the fort
and found the hoped-for water. He was busy filling his leathern-bottle,
when an arrow whizzed by and very nearly hit him; and a second arrow
followed. He shouted out: “Stop your shooting. I am a monk from the
Capital.” Soldiers ran up, dragged him into the fort, and took him
before their captain. He produced papers which proved his identity,
and was treated with the respect due to a priest of Buddha; yet the
Captain urged him to return home. Finding the pilgrim to be a man of
heroic piety and inflexible will, he set out with him and guided him
some distance along the way to the next fort. He even gave Hiuen-Tsiang
a message to its captain, recommending the pilgrim to his favour and
assistance. But the message was a verbal one only. And Hiuen-Tsiang was
not sure that he might not find more rigour and less charity at the
next watch-tower; so, when he came up to it, he crept furtively towards
its base, in search of water as before. The dispatch of an arrow was
sufficient warning; he came into the open, and the scene at the first
fort was re-enacted. He repeated the message to its Captain; and this
second officer gave him hospitable entertainment and better advice. For
he urged him to avoid the third fort, which was held by rough soldiery,
who would not be nice in making delicate distinctions and might easily
become violent. And he directed him to take a route which avoided this
fort altogether, and along which, at ten leagues distance, he would
come across sweet water.

He set off across the arid plain, where was neither beast nor bird to
be seen, nor blade of grass, nor any sign of moisture—only mirage. A
pandemonium of fantastic forms encircled him; forms begotten of the
Power of Evil. But he felt secure in the midst of devils; for did he
not bear, folded in his bosom, a sure talisman—none other than a
Sacred Manuscript, the gift of grateful leper to whom he had stood as a
friend?

Illusory peril was followed by solid disaster: he dropped his
water-bottle and spilled its precious contents. Next, his horse lost
its way, and made the same long circuit again and again. For a moment,
he was tempted to assay a return to the fort: he brushed the thought
aside, turned his horse’s head to the North-West, and pushed on.

Night came on. Evil spirits seized on the opportunity to close in on
him. Every demon bore a burning torch. They were more in multitude than
the stars of heaven. Four horrid nights, filled with hallucination,
wore away. Four days he struggled on, tortured by thirst, his body one
ache. At last horse and rider fell to the ground, worn out. Death was
close at hand when a refreshing night-breeze swept over the desert,
and horse and rider renewed the struggle. Suddenly, the horse insisted
on taking his own way: he had scented water; and soon a little oasis
was reached. It was uninhabited; but a day’s rest there refreshed man
and beast; and, on the third day, the traveller saw the last of the
shifting sands of Shamo and came to the pastures of the Uïghurs.

In the capital, probably identical with the town now known as Hâmî, he
found a Buddhist monastery, wherein dwelt three Chinese monks. He had
already made fully 600 miles from Liang-chau; but that was as nothing
to the journey which lay before him; and from this he was compelled to
digress. For he was in a region tributary to the ruler of Kau-chang
(Turfan) and this monarch, having heard of his arrival, ordered that
he should be sent on to him. Six days of travel to the West, through
a desert, brought him to Turfan. The Lord-paramount of the Uïghurs
received him with all honour and much state-ceremony. He sat under
a “canopy of precious stuffs” pitched in the courtyard of a palace.
Soon after the pilgrim’s arrival, the queen, accompanied by her suite,
appeared; but Hiuen-Tsiang being fatigued, their Majesties retired to
the “palace,” and he was conducted to his chamber, where eunuchs served
and guarded him. Next day he was taken to a Buddhist convent, still in
the custody of the eunuchs. For the monarch had resolved to keep such a
holy person for the better instruction of his subjects.

Hiuen-Tsiang incurred the royal displeasure by stoutly refusing to do
as he was bid and stay on. Then ensued, in that far away time and half
barbaric land, the ancient and ever recurrent struggle which history
so copiously illustrates—the contest between regnant authority and
the claims of religion. At one time the despot tried to brow-beat; at
another time, to cajole; he even put aside his dignity and offered
to serve the monk at table. Both men were equally resolute; and the
situation seemed hopeless, when Hiuen-Tsiang bethought him of an
expedient with which we moderns became familiar at no very recent
date. He started to hunger-strike. In four days the result of this
policy alarmed the King. The queen-mother declared herself for the holy
pilgrim, and the monarch gave in. He begged that Hiuen-Tsiang would at
least stay in the country during one short month. The monk accepted the
compromise; and in that single month his unaffected piety, passionate
singleness of aim and personal attraction did the work they never
failed to accomplish everywhere and on every occasion. Moral intensity
was the secret of his success.

And so we see the poor wanderer who came to Uïghur-land alone,
famished, and half dead, leaving the land under the protection of an
armed escort, and provided, not merely with an ample supply of warm
clothing for the heights he must cross, but with 100 ounces of gold,
30,000 pieces of silver and 500 pieces of satin for the presents
which were necessary and to pay his way. He was also given letters of
recommendation to the Princes of the West. Monks and the population of
the city followed him beyond its gates; and the despot, having sent the
queen and people back, conducted him surrounded by his whole court,
some miles on his journey.

The route lay westward, over a difficult, mountainous land. Southward
lay the Tarim, a considerable river, which discharges itself into
Lob-nor, one of the numerous inland salt-seas of Asia, for ever
rising and falling and shifting its boundaries. It was well that the
pilgrim had a military escort; for a band of brigands lurked among the
mountains. They were probably quite as strong as the Uïghur soldiery;
for negotiations were entered into, and ended in their being bought
off. A little farther on there was ghastly evidence that these
ruffians had recently attacked and destroyed a caravan of traders: a
few score corpses lay stretched out on the ground.

When Kara-shahr (Karshâr) was reached, its King behaved courteously,
but refused to grant fresh horses, by reason of the frequent raiding of
his domain by the Uïghurs. He was disquieted by the presence of Uïghur
soldiery. Hiuen-Tsiang tells us, among much else that is interesting,
that the coinage here was of gold, silver and copper,—that there
were ten Buddhist monasteries of the Lesser Vehicle; that these were
properly kept, but that the country “had no annals” and that “the laws
were not settled. The people clothe themselves in cotton or wool, and
go about with their scalps shorn and uncovered.”

The separate account of each country the pilgrim visited or concerning
which he believed he had credible information—his great monumental
work—the _Si-yu-ki_—begins with Kara-shahr which he calls Akni
or Agni. One is at once struck with the exactness of the author’s
observation, the orderliness of his mind, and the minute precision of
his statement. One is equally astounded at his oriental love of the
marvellous and his eager haste to record every grotesque and absurd
legend. There is before us a man as full as any modern explorer of
ardent zeal for travel, eager curiosity, keen eye, and quick interest
in all that is novel and peculiar. There is the same intellectual grasp
of the natural features, products and government of strange countries.
But Hiuen-Tsiang’s inmost, burning passion is revealed both in this
book and in the biography compiled from his documents and discourse
by two pupils and intimate friends Hwui-Lih and Yen-Tsong[1]: it was
for all that appertained to his religion, whether sacred writing or
Buddhist monuments or the relics of saints. When he deals with mundane
matters he rarely goes astray. And, from his earliest years, he bore a
sacred flame, a consuming fire in his breast, fed by the highest and
holiest emotions and aspirations of man. But, although he breathed the
breath of life, the purest atmosphere of the East in his century was
tainted by superstition. The mental disposition for the marvellous,
implanted in him at a tender age, and sustained by precept and example,
waxed with the years. The absurdest legends became credible if they
bore the name of his faith. This close observer, this clear minded
man became passionate for prodigies, had a Gargantuan swallow for the
superstitious-grotesque. Brought up on legend, he soon found himself in
a home of fable. He records every marvellous tale which is told him,
and worships at every shrine which guards any relic of wonder. And this
although he was not wanting in passion for orderly thinking.

News from Kara-shahr that a holy pilgrim, bound for India, might be
expected reached the next Kingdom, and he found monks standing to greet
him at the gate of Kutchê, its capital. Feelings of simple grace and
beauty dwelt in those Eastern hearts; they welcomed him with a gift
of flowers. But the strict laws of his order did not permit of his
accepting these for himself. He placed them before an image of Buddha,
Teacher of the Law. Kutchê was a land of music, its people excelling
all others on the lute and pipe. They were a wholly honest folk,
with an incompetent ruler. “The King’s wisdom being small,” says our
Chinaman, “he is ruled by a private minister. The heads of children of
the humbler order are flattened by the pressure of a wooden board”;
which recalls the custom of certain North American Indians. The King
had ordered a banquet to honour his visitor; but the strictness of the
rule which Hiuen-Tsiang followed forbade him to be present. This cast
the potentate into a mighty rage; but once again the simplicity and
sincerity of the pilgrim’s character, which glowed in his countenance,
disarmed wrath. He was retained at Kutchê, an honoured guest, until
such time as the snows should melt. He spent two months there, chiefly
occupied in religious discussion with the monks. He tells us that the
monarch and his ministers met together once a month to discuss matters
of state, and consulted the priests before publishing their decrees.

When the season ripened and the ways became open once more, he was sent
forth in magnificent pomp and protection; he was accompanied by an
armed escort and a staff of servants, all mounted on camels and horses.
The escort was very necessary; for a great horde of Turkish robbers
were passed on the way, quarrelling about the booty of a caravan which
they had stopped and plundered. A march of about 120 miles brought
our party to a small desert which they crossed over, and so entered
the domain of another Khân. A single night was spent at what is now
Bai, where he found Buddhist monasteries, and the party pushed across
another small desert. The towering and forbidding ranges of Thian-shan
were before them, “very dangerous and reaching up to the sky.” Indeed
Khân Tengri, the highest mountain of the range, has an elevation of
24,000 feet. The imposing features of the mountain-masses and the
horror of the passes across them left indelible marks on Hiuen-Tsiang’s
memory. “Since the creation of the world,” he says, “the snow has
gathered there and become frozen blocks, which spring and summer cannot
melt. Shining sheets of solid ice spread before one, and there is, as
it were, no end to them; they blend with the clouds. Frozen splinters
have become detached and have fallen; some of these are an hundred
feet high; others measure some dozens of feet athwart, and they bar
the way. You attempt to climb over the former kind at your peril; you
get across the latter with pain. And all the time tempest assails
you with gusts of wind and whirling drifts of snow; so that double
soles to your foot-gear and fur garments to your body fail to keep
out the cold. Of dry shelter there is none, either to feed or sleep
in. You have to sling up your cooking-pot and lay your sleeping mat
on the frozen ground.” Mountain-staves were used, and we learn from
the _Si-yu-ki_ (the “Record of Western Countries”) that mountaineers
were accustomed to cut steps in the ice. But to climb uncharted hills,
among the highest of the world, led by guides of no great experience;
to make one’s way over rock and glacier unroped and unprovided with
specially constructed boots; to sleep in the open in rarified and
arctic air; to live on poor food, and often to lack it, was to loathe
the mountain-pass. And this Hiuen-Tsiang did, heartily.

It cost the caravan seven dolorous days to cross the higher ranges,
and, by the time the western uplands were reached, 13 or 14 strong men
had been lost through cold and hunger, and more than double that number
of beasts of burthen.

Beyond the mountains, the uplands of Western Turkestan lie at a higher
level than that reached by Ben Nevis, and they embosom a great inland
sea—the Issyk-Kul, which lies nearly 5,000 feet up. Wending their
way along its southern shore, our travellers ran into a hunting party
of the Khân of the Turks. Only half a century had then passed since
nomadic Turkish tribes possessed themselves of the “thousand sources”
of those two great rivers which lose themselves in the Aral Sea, which
are known to modern geographers as Amu Daria and Syr Daria, and which
readers of the classics know as Oxus and Jaxartes. The Turks speedily
became masters of the fertile plains of Sogdiana and Bactria, subdued
the tribes that occupied the region we call Bokhâra, and extended their
sway into the very heart of the Hindû Kûsh, reaching as far south as
the Kapiśa of the Greeks—that is to say, within a few miles of Kâbul.

We have an interesting account of how the Nomadic Ruler gave the
travellers a gracious reception within a great tent, resplendent with
cloth of gold. Two long rows of dignitaries, clad in figured silks
of many colours, squatted on mats before the Khân; behind him stood
the royal guard. He wore a cloak of green satin; his long hair was
bound over the forehead by several folds of silk, the ends whereof
fell over his back. When on horseback, two hundred captains, gay in
brocade and riding horses with plaited tails, and an army with banners,
spears and long bows accompanied him. This was not foot soldiery;
horses or camels were ridden, and the men were clad in furs and fine
wool. One could see no end to the army, it was such a multitude. Our
author tells us that the Turk of his day worshipped fire, and sat on
mats, since wooden chairs contain the quality of fire. Ten centuries
later Sir Thomas Browne, in his “Urn-Burial” refers to the Parsees
of India “which expose their bodies unto vultures and endure not so
much as _feretra_ or biers of wood, the proper fuel of fire.” A huge
arm-chair, made of iron and covered with a mat was brought in for
the use of Hiuen-Tsiang. The whole party was invited to sit, Turkish
fashion; wine was brought in, cups clinked, and everybody drank, turn
and turn about; while music, which to Chinese ears was barbaric yet
not unpleasing, came from strange instruments. After the wine, legs
and shoulders of boiled mutton and veal were brought in; but the
Buddhist was separately served with “pure food”—rice-cake, cream,
milk, crystallized sugar, honeycomb and grapes. Of course the divine
gadfly which pursued our hero stung him to testify on this occasion, as
on all other opportunities, whether in season or out of season. But his
personality stood him in good stead; moreover, to this day, a holy man
is respected throughout the pagan East, no matter what his faith may
be. The Khân was interested and attentive; even impressed. He raised
his hands towards heaven, cast himself on the ground, kept Hiuen-Tsiang
about his person for some days, and earnestly besought him to give up
his project. “You must not go,” he said. “The country is a very hot
one. You look too frail a man to give hope of your success. The natives
are black; they go about naked; they have no modesty; they are unworthy
of your presence among them.” “Whatever I may be,” replied the Master
of the Law, “I burn with longing to seek for the commands of Buddha,
to inspect the ancient monuments, and to follow lovingly the track of
our Lord’s footpath on earth.” What followed marks yet once more the
personal ascendency of our hero in every situation. This half-savage
head of wild Mongolian hordes sought straightway for some one who knew
Chinese and could also interpret the confusion of tongues in his own
subject-lands to the south. Such a man was speedily picked out of the
Khân’s army; for Chinese had been carried off by the Turkish Hiung-nu
(a people possibly, though by no means certainly, identical with the
terrible Huns whom Attila led to devastate Europe) and had settled down
in towns, deserted when Hiuen-Tsiang arrived in the district, but where
they had kept up their native tongue, although they had adopted Turkish
dress and ways. With true Eastern courtesy to a guest, the great Khân
accompanied our traveller some little way on his journey.

At first the route lay westward towards the “Land of the Thousand
Sources”—a region of lakes and pools, great trees, much vegetation,
and a sweet and wooing air. Hither the Khân was wont to repair in
summer. Still travelling westward, Talas was reached, and then, by
bending round to the South-West and South, Samarkand, the “storehouse
of precious merchandise from many foreign countries.” Our traveller
found the ruler “full of courage, and controlling neighbouring
countries” with his fierce soldiery. He received the pilgrim with an
air of lofty disdain; but Hiuen-Tsiang was not a man to be daunted,
and, next day, when he boldly set forth his faith, contempt became
respect. Buddhism was practically dead in Samarkand. The monasteries
were empty. Two young monks who were with Hiuen-Tsiang sought to pass
the night in one of these vacant buildings; but the populace threw
burning brands at them and drove them out. The King condemned the
offenders to decapitation; but Hiuen-Tsiang pleaded for mercy; so
they were merely beaten and expelled from the city. His successful
intercession increased the fervour of his missionary zeal; nor did he
toil in vain; the monasteries were re-opened; and he ordained priests
to fill them.

Leaving Samarkand, about 90 miles off, he entered a pass bordered by
mountains “of prodigious heighth, with a narrow road” to add “to the
difficulty and danger.” The pass was closed by double wooden doors,
studded with iron, and hung with bells. The pass owed its name—The
Iron Gates—to these strong defences.

The Oxus was reached and crossed, and our pilgrim now deviates
considerably from the direct route to fulfil a promise which he had
made to the Khân of the Uïghurs to visit his son-in-law, the son of
the great Khân of the Turks, who ruled over a little Khânate, called
Hwo, and probably identical with the district which lies east of the
Surkh-âb. When he arrived, he found the monarch on his death-bed; and
was obliged to wait two months until the funeral ceremonies were done
with. During this time a tragedy took place which casts a lurid light
on court-life in Central Asia during the Seventh Century, and which
reminds us of the Italian tragedies during the High Renaissance. The
wife of the Khân had died, and the Khân replaced her by marrying her
young sister. At the instigation of a son by the first marriage, the
bride murders her husband. “The serpent that did sting his father’s
life now wears his crown,” and marries his aunt-step-mother. A similar
atrocity is recorded of the Chinese Imperial family in Hiuen-Tsiang’s
time. In A.D. 655 the Emperor, Kao-Tsung, deposed the Empress and
married one of his father’s widows, who wholly ruled him, cut off
the feet of the Empress, and of another queen, and then had these
unfortunate ladies drowned “like Clarence in his Malmsey-butt,” in a
vat of wine.

Hiuen-Tsiang was fortunate in finding a monk who had dwelt in India and
had studied the Scriptures there; and the twain set forth for Balkh
in some sort of waggon. At Balkh, he found no fewer than a hundred
Buddhist monasteries, three thousand monks, and sacred memorials and
relics beyond count. He might have become very rich; for the Kinglets
around Balkh were eager to secure a visit from such a holy being, and
offered to load him with gold and jewels. But he was not the man to
depart from the straight and narrow path he had chosen. He refused them
one and all, and set forth for ways “even more difficult and dangerous
than the deserts of ice. Every moment one is at battle there with
frozen cloud or snow-whirlwind. Sometimes one is faced with worse than
this, even, namely, morasses of mud, dozens of feet wide. Ice, pile on
pile, rises into mountain masses, snow-blasts dash on for a hundred
leagues.” “The raging spirits and demons of the mountains send every
kind of calamity; and there are murderous robbers to be met with.” Thus
does Hiuen Tsiang describe the passage of the Hindû Kûsh.

At Bâmiyân, in the heart of Afghanistan, a great centre of Buddhism
after the model of the Little Vehicle, he was honourably received by
its ruler and rested five days in his palace. He visited the great
Buddhist images, hewn out of the solid rock (which our soldiers saw
in the Afghan Campaign of 1843) and other remarkable monuments. On
the second day after leaving Bâmiyân, he was caught in a blinding
snowstorm, lost his way, and was like to perish, when mountaineers
who were out hunting came across him and put him on the right track.
A mountain pass brought him to the Kapiśa of Ptolemy and Pliny. It
was situated a little to the north of the present Kâbul. Here “the
people were fierce and cruel speaking a rude tongue, their marriage a
mere intermingling of the sexes.” The monarch, shrewd, brave, firm and
sagacious, had established a little empire by bringing ten neighbouring
States under his overlordship, and had won the love of his subjects.
Hearing of the approach of the pilgrim, this potentate set out to meet
him, accompanied by a procession of monks. These pietists of various
monasteries of the Great and Little Vehicle remained sufficiently
human to quarrel as to which house should shelter so rare a guest. Now
the King was an enthusiastic supporter of the more rigid Order; and
Hiuen-Tsiang would naturally have prepared to take up his abode in a
convent of the Great Vehicle. But the appeal of the monks of a convent
following the Little Vehicle, an appeal made on historic grounds,
touched him; yet one of the monks who had accompanied him showed strong
repugnance to sleep in a house of Hiuen-Tsiang’s rival and stricter
sect. Our Chinese was neither a Courtier nor a Pharisee; he could
“suffer fools gladly,” and took up his abode with the weaker brethren.
Then the rivals had but one voice in entreating him to uncover a
treasure, which had been set aside for the repair of some religious
house, and which lay buried beneath the foot of an image of Buddha.




CHAPTER IV.

THROUGH INDIA IN THE SEVENTH CENTURY.


He passed the wet season at Kapiśa, and then, protected by the King’s
envoys, went along the North bank of the Kâbul river and through
districts memorable in the record of the Indian expedition of Alexander
the Great. Again and again do we come across the names of places
familiar to the reader of Arrian and Strabo. He visited Peshâwar and
Attock; he travelled through many a little Kingdom of what is now
North-Eastern Afghanistan and the North-West Provinces of India, by
zig-zag and perplexing routes. Here was the classic soil of ancient
Brâhmanism; here was to be found many a Buddhist record of the great
days of Aśôka. It was a land of monasteries and monuments, of countless
_stûpas_ (monuments containing relics) and sculptured stones, of
ancient tradition and extravagant myth. The recording carvings of ages
still stood thick on the ground or lay there in ruin. He saw every one
of them, traversing perilous ravines by the help of chains affixed to
the rocks; crossing frail swaying bridges made of rope. He got as far
north as Baltistân, or Little Thibet, “in the midst of the Great Snowy
Mountains.” More than six centuries later, Marco Polo refers to the
inhabitants as “an evil race of savage idolaters,” and Hiuen-Tsiang
found their forefathers “fierce, passionate folk, ill-mannered, and of
uncouth speech.” “Strictly speaking, they do not belong to India, but
are rude frontier-folk.” Sometimes the ways were deserted; for brigands
were abroad. Almost everywhere Brâhmanism was in the ascendent;
Buddhism in decay; but, as yet, the rivalry of the two creeds had
nowhere become acute; rival religionists behaved kindly and courteously
one to another; and Brâhmans received the traveller with generous
hospitality. Yet the careful student will not fail to observe that the
antagonism between Brâhman and Buddhist, which is evident in the pages
of Fa-Hien, had not decreased in the two centuries since his time. For
Exoteric Brâhmanism, with its clever adaptation of the ancient gods of
India; its appeal to the imagination of the vulgar, always concrete
in character and incapable of comprehending an abstract proposition;
its deities, embodying human passion and evoking human sympathies; its
support of human pride in the institution of caste; its intercessory
priesthood and vicarious sacrifice; and its supple manipulation of
men to obtain power, was on the high road to revival. But there is an
esoteric Brâhmanism, as Macaulay found out, always the lofty, pure
creed of the educated Hindu.

Hiuen-Tsiang went up and down and to and fro in these frontier-states,
threading many a delicious valley which nestled among the mountains
and was overlooked by the snows of Himalaya; and returning from time
to time to the more enervating atmosphere of the valley of the Indus.
The King of Kaśmîr (Cashmir) visited him at a monastery where he was
staying, preceded by a brilliant procession. The roadway was covered
with umbrellas and banners; it was carpeted with flowers, and the
air was filled with sweet scents. The monarch was full of compliment
and shows of respect, and scattered a great quantity of flowers in
Hiuen-Tsiang’s honour. Then he begged him to take his seat on a great
elephant. And he walked behind him. The pilgrim remained two years
in Kasmîr, sitting at the feet of a sage, studying Sanskrit and the
Buddhist scriptures. Indeed, throughout all his travels, he was forever
studying or collecting or transcribing manuscripts, when he was not
visiting and venerating relics.

Now near Nagarahâra, in the district of Jalâlâbâd, there was a certain
cavern, where, peradventure, the pious might behold the shadow which
Buddha had cast on its walls. It had been granted to Sung-Yun to see
it, when the Empress Dowager of a Tartar dynasty which ruled in
Northern China sent him and another on an embassy to obtain Buddhist
books (A.D. 518); and Hiuen-Tsiang was consumed by desire to see it
also. His escort from Kapiśa earnestly begged him not to make the
attempt; it was a rash and perilous project; brigands were abroad; and
few indeed were those who might see the holy vision. They could not
dissuade him; so they left him and went home, and he took an old man as
guide. When he got near the cavern five brigands pounced upon him. He
pointed to his monks’ robe and told them that, if they were brigands,
they were none the less men, and he had no fear of men, or even of wild
beasts, when sacred duty called him. He touched their hearts, and they
let him go.

Although a man visited by visions and a dreamer of significant dreams,
he spent a long time in the cave and saw nothing. Prostrations and
convictions of sin were in vain. Then, quite suddenly, came a flash
of light; thereupon he vowed that he would not quit the spot until
he should behold the veritable shade. In the end the reward of such
persistent enthusiasm was bestowed: he beheld the Buddha, attended by
his sacred court, in all their heavenly splendour. But, just then,
torch-bearers came into the cave, intending to burn perfumes in the
holy place, and the glory disappeared. Hiuen-Tsiang ordered them to
put out their lights, and lo! there was the vision as before. Five
of the six torch-bearers declared that they beheld the shadow. It is
characteristic of our pilgrim that he is careful to tell us that the
sixth man saw nothing whatever. Never a shadow of doubt arises as to
his good faith. Sung-Yun the Chinese ambassador and pilgrim, writing
an account of his journey a hundred years before Hiuen-Tsiang, tells
us how, “Entering the mountain cavern fifteen feet and looking for a
long time (or, at a long distance?) at the western side of it, opposite
the entrance, at length, the figure, with its characteristic marks,
appears; on going nearer to look at it, it gradually grows fainter,
and then disappears. On touching the place where it was with the hand,
there is nothing but the bare wall. Gradually retreating, the figure
begins to come into view again, and foremost is conspicuous that
peculiar mark between the eyebrows, which is so rare among men.” And
Hiuen-Tsiang tells us, in his “Records of Western Lands,” that in later
days the shadow has faded to a feeble likeness, although, by fervent
prayer, it may be clearly seen, “though not for long.”

Leaving the North-Western corner of India, he now proceeded through the
Punjâb. Many a city he names has perished, and not a stone thereof is
left; of others a few stones mark the seat of departed greatness; but
often the names recall the Embassy of Megasthenes and differ but little
from those by which they were known to the Greeks of a yet earlier age.

He had left certain rude tribes behind him, yet he found particular
districts by no means free from murderous gangs; and he had to traverse
many a forest inhabited by wild elephants and great beasts of prey. In
one forest, he and fellow-monks who accompanied him found themselves at
the mercy of half a hundred armed brigands, who chased them into the
bed of a pond which had run dry. Hiuen-Tsiang and some others contrived
to hide among thorny bushes and coarse growth; but some of the company
were caught and bound. Happily a hollow, scooped out by escaping
waters, was hit upon; and our pilgrim and some who were in hiding
contrived to make their way out. About half a mile off they came across
a Brâhman ploughing with oxen; and he took them to a village hard
by. He blew a conch and beat a drum, and soon 80 men of the village
snatched up their arms and gathered together to attack the robbers.
These latter, seeing so many bounding towards them, made off with all
speed; the villagers found and released their captives, who lay bound,
stripped, and quite helpless, groaning and weeping many tears. The
good people of the village covered their nakedness and took them to
their homes for food and shelter. “Master,” said one of the monks, to
Hiuen-Tsiang, “all that we had has been taken by the thieves, and we
have barely got off with our lives. How is it you can smile and look so
cheerful!” “Because life is man’s greatest boon,” was the reply. “When
that has been saved, why vex one’s self over clothes and food?”

Soon we are with Hiuen-Tsiang at a centre of Brâhmanism which was
probably Lâhôr (Lahore). Everywhere he is received with courtesy;
usually welcomed with procession and pageantry. Before very long, we
find him making a long détour to the cold upper valley of the Bujas
river, under the Himalayas, and among a rude, hard, fierce race, but
one that had a regard for justice as well as for courage.

He returns to a warmer latitude, and reaches Mathurâ, or Muttra, on the
River Jumna; a place once famous for the relics stored in its _stûpas_.
Here, different convents followed different authorities; but once a
year they gathered together, and each sect made offering before the
relics of its chosen saint. A little later, after traversing several
small States, it would seem that he visited the source of the Ganges,
although, in spite of explicit statement, this has been doubted. He
speaks of the river as being 3/4 mile wide at its source! May he not
mean that the end of its parent glacier is of that width?[2]

A little later on, we are told of the softness of Ganges water; of
how multitudes of bathers assemble on its sandy banks to cleanse them
of sin; and how a mere rinsing of the mouth with its water wall avert
every calamity and secure future blessedness. “But there is no truth in
this universal belief, which is wholly the invention of heresy,” adds
our traveller, critical of everything but the superstitions which had
encrusted his own faith. And he is of opinion that this special form of
false belief is on the wane among the Indian people!

We find him before long in Western Rohilkand, and then again in an icy
Himalayan valley, where “for ages a woman has ruled; wherefore it is
called the Kingdom of the Eastern Women.” It corresponds to what is
now British Garwal and Kumain. As then, so is it to-day: relics of the
matriarchate and polyandry are to be found among the Himalayan ranges.

He returns to the Ganges, and, passing through several small States,
arrives at Kanauj. He is for ever visiting scholars, and sits for
months at the feet of every famous sage. He does so at Kanauj, which he
tells us is a city measuring four miles in length and one in breadth.
He is now in an Empire recently established by Sîlâditya, a warrior
of the Vaiśya, or trading, class, who had forced a number of petty
Kinglets to become his tributaries. Sîlâditya would seem to have been
a devout Buddhist, favouring the Greater Vehicle, and, really devoting
himself to the prosperity of the Empire he ruled.

He now enters Ayôdhyâ—Oude—the same name that, eleven centuries
later, rang so compellingly in the ears of Clive and Warren Hastings.
Here Brâhmanism was getting the upper hand. And there was not merely
much lawlessness but a terrible perversion of religious worship
abroad in this land, which reminds one of modern Thuggee. A boat with
Hiuen-Tsiang and eighty others on board was gliding peacefully down the
Ganges, when a whole little navy of pirates, which had lain concealed
under the dense foliage of the river-bank, shot out into mid-stream,
and surrounded the pilgrim’s vessel. Some of the passengers leaped
into the river; those who remained in the vessel were towed ashore and
robbed. Now these water-thieves were devotees of the goddess Durgâ, the
wife of Siva, and were wont to offer at her altar a yearly sacrifice
of some unblemished human victim, selected from their captives. They
carefully examined Hiuen-Tsiang, and pronounced him fit for this
purpose. Some of his companions generously offered to take his place;
but the pirates would have none of them—Hiuen-Tsiang and he alone was
the goddess’ chosen prey. He, of all the company, remained calm and
undismayed. “Let me enter Nirvâna tranquil and happy,” he said, his
mind wholly occupied with some future incarnation wherein he might turn
such cruel hearts as those of the pirates. These, amazed, and even
touched, by his meek and compassionate fortitude, granted him a few
more minutes of life. Just at this moment, a squall came on, so fierce
that it terrified the pirates, even. Hiuen-Tsiang’s companions were
loud in exclaiming that it was heaven’s warning of the awful vengeance
which would ensue on the murder of a saint. The hearts of the homicides
were stricken by fear. One of them took the pilgrim’s hand. He only
felt the pressure; for his eyes were closed and he was wrapt in some
celestial vision. He asked if the fatal moment had come; and when he
learned that the mind of the robbers was changed, he began to unfold
“the Law” to them with such persuasive power that they cast their
instruments of sacrifice into the river, restored what they had stolen,
and quietly went their way.

He visited Prayâga (Allahabad), near the confluence of the Ganges and
Jumna, and then took a dangerous course, south-west, through a forest
infested with wild elephants and beasts of prey, to Kosâmbi-nagar, now
a mere village on the Jumna, only to find ten Buddhist monasteries
ruined and deserted and fifty temples of flourishing Brâhmanism,
frequented by an enormous number of “heretics.” Thence he travelled
northwards, and came to Gautama’s birth place, Kapila. It was a waste.
Almost everywhere Brâhmanism was quietly triumphing and Buddhism in
gentle decay; although it was not until the following century that this
shrivelling process became rapid, and four or five centuries had yet to
pass before new dynasties sacked monasteries and burned their inmates
or expelled them from India in such wise that Buddhism became extinct
throughout the Great Peninsula.

At Bânâras (Benares) he saw Brâhman ascetics who shaved the head, or
went about naked, or covered themselves with ashes, and “by all manner
of austerity sought to escape from any more births and deaths.” He
tells us of the blueness of the sacred river and its rolling waves; of
the sweet taste of its waters and the fineness of its sands; of how
numbers of people, in order to wash away the pollution of sin, “would
abstain from eating for seven days, and then drown themselves in the
sacred stream. Daily, towards sunset, ascetics would climb up a pillar
set in the middle of the river, cling to it by one hand and one foot in
a marvellous manner, and gaze at the sun until he went down, when they
would descend. Thereby they hoped to escape from reincarnation.” “If
the body of a dead man be cast into the stream, he cannot fall into an
evil way. Swept on by its waters and forgotten by men, he is safe on
the other side.”

It was at Bânâras that Gautama began his evangel, and the vast district
between Jumna and the mountains of Nepal was the main scene of his
labours. In the Kingdom of Magadha, which, like Kanduj, was under the
rule of Sîlâditya, he found an area of fourteen miles covered with the
ruins of a city which was flourishing when Fa-Hien visited India. The
stones of _stûpas_, monasteries, pagodas and hospitals for men and
beasts cumbered the ground.

While Hiuen-Tsiang was staying at the place where Gautama “Sâkyamûni”
as he was called during the ascetic portion of his career—that is to
say, “the sage of the family of the Sâkyas”—became “Buddha,” or “the
Enlightener of men,” a deputation of four of the most distinguished
monks of the great Sarighârâma of Nâlanda—the greatest scholastic and
monastic institution in the world—came to him bearing an invitation
to stay there. When he arrived he was welcomed with much state and
ceremony. Two hundred monks and crowds of people greeted him, singing
songs in his praise, bearing standards and umbrellas, and scattering
flowers and scent. They raised him to a seat of honour, and then the
sub-director sounded a gong and repeated the invitation. Twenty grave
and reverend seniors of the monastery presented him to the Father
Superior, who was no other than the famous scholar Sîlabhadra, a
dignitary so exalted that no one dared name him except by his title
of “Treasury of the Righteous Law.” Hiuen-Tsiang had to drag himself
towards this sage on knees and elbows, clacking his heels together,
and striking the ground with his brow. This done, seats were brought
forward, compliments were interchanged, and the pilgrim was made free
of the institution. The best rooms were given up to him; ten servants
were allotted to him, and, daily he was furnished with an ample supply
of food at the cost of the monks and the Râja. A Buddhist monk and a
Brâhman, dwelling in peace together, took him abroad from time to time
and shewed him the holy sights of the neighbourhood, seated in state on
an elephant or carried in a palanquin; but when he was in the convent
the “Treasury of the Righteous Law” devoted no small measure of his
time to his instruction in the higher learning.

In the Seventh Century there was not, in the whole world a seat of
learning which might compare with the splendid establishment at
Nâlanda. It had been magnificently endowed by a succession of monarchs
and still enjoyed the royal favour as much as ever. There were open
courts and secluded gardens; splendid trees, casting a grateful shade,
under which the monks and novices might meditate; cool fountains of
fresh water that gurgled delightfully in the hot season. Ten thousand
inmates dwelt in six blocks of buildings four stories high, which
looked out on large courts. There were a hundred rooms set apart for
lectures on religion and on all the science and literature of the time.
There were halls wherein disputations frequently took place; and in
these Hiuen-Tsiang took a distinguished part. The monks impressed him
favourably: he found them sincere, and living in the strict observance
of severe rules. He says: “from morning to night, young and old help
each other in discussions, for which they find the day too short.” The
mental power and learning of the monks were as renowned as the towers,
the pavilions, and the cool retreats of the convent-university in which
they dwelt. The study of medicine and natural history and useful and
useless branches of mundane research was by no means cast aside for
speculation. But the latter was of so subtle a character that, while
ten hundred might be found capable of expounding twenty books of the
Sâtras and Sâstras, only five hundred could deal with thirty books, and
only ten with fifty; although students were not admitted until they had
proved themselves men of parts, and well-read in books, old and new,
by hard public discussion; and of ten candidates for admission, seven
or eight were rejected. Altogether, Hiuen-Tsiang spent five years in
study here; and he became one of the ten who could expound fifty sacred
books. But Sîlabhadra, the Father Superior, who was his tutor, had left
no sacred book unstudied.

From Nâlanda, our pilgrim proceeded to Patna, and crossing the Ganges,
visited Gayâ. He saw everything worth seeing in the country about
Bhagalpur, and found there a monastery of the first order, the origin
of which was a curious history. A “heretic” from South India had
marched into the country, staff in hand, with stately step and pompous
mien, beating “the drum of discussion.” On his head, he bore a lighted
torch, and his belly was encased in plates of shining copper. When
asked the reason for such strange attire, he replied that the torch
was to enlighten the ignorant multitude, who dwelt in darkness, and
the belt was for self-preservation, since he was so filled with wisdom
that he feared his belly would burst. In spite of this mummery, he
proved himself so well instructed and persuasive that all the learned
men in the Kingdom were unable to controvert his arguments. At last, a
Buddhist from Southern India was sent for and reduced him to silence.
The Râja was so impressed by the victory that he founded the monastery.

Our traveller now came to the land of the sugar-cane. His account of
the Kingdoms he visited after leaving the chief scenes of Gautama’s
missionary zeal, and the history of his wanderings, put together from
his notes and conversations with his pupils, become less full than
before; but it is clear that he made his way to “the shore-country” of
the Bay of Bengal, which would seem to be the Sunderbans, between the
rivers Ganges and Hûgli—afterwards a name of horror, as the lair of
infamous Portuguese pirates. At all events, he crossed the great Delta
of the Ganges, intending to embark for Ceylon at Tamluk on the Selai,
just where that river joins the Hûgli. Fa-Hian had done so, and had
seen Ceylon and its monuments; but Hiuen-Tsiang was given such accounts
of the perils of the long voyage that anxiety for the safety of the
treasures he had collected induced him to travel by land to South
India, and he determined to sail thence across the narrow Palk Strait.
So he returned inland, nearly as far back as Bhagalpur again, and
proceeded thence to Orissa. Thence he travelled south-westward to the
district watered by the upper tributaries of the Mahanadi and Godavari
in Central India; penetrating many a pestiferous marsh and perilous
jungle, deep and dangerous forest and scorching desert-plain, before
he arrived at Congeveram, the Dravidian capital, a little south-west of
Madras and north-west of Pondicherri. Here he learned that Ceylon had
become the theatre of a bloody war and that it would be impossible to
reach it. So he turned his reluctant steps to the north.

He tells of the courage, honesty and love of truth of the Dravidian
race, and of the heat and fruitfulness of the land they inhabited. He
speaks of his return-journey as being partly through “a wild forest
and many deserted villages where bands of brigands attack travellers.”
Then, going north-west, he came to the country of the Mahrattas—not
the modern race which goes by that name, but a people who apparently
were Rajpoots, the old military Aryan aristocracy of India, whose
widows, following a Scythian custom, cast themselves on the funeral
pyre of their husbands to be worthy of their chivalry and to rejoin
them in the next life. Hiuen-Tsiang describes the Mahrattas as being
tall of stature, honest and simple; grateful to friends, relentless to
enemies. They avenged an insult at the risk of life; they would forget
all about themselves in their haste to give aid. They always gave
due warning to a foe before attacking him, and spared the enemy who
should yield. A commander who lost a battle was not directly punished;
but he received a present of women’s clothes, and this was enough:
it drove him to suicide. The army was of several hundred chosen men,
who went into battle drunk, and made their elephants drunk also. Then
they would rush forward in close array, bearing everything before them
and trampling on the foe. Nothing could withstand such an onset. And
one man all alone, with his lance in hand, was always quite ready to
challenge and fight ten thousand. These champions had drums beaten
before them every time they went abroad; and should one of them come
across a man and slay him no notice of the offence was taken.

Passing through Western India and States which bordered on the Arabian
Sea, we find our traveller in Southern Malwa and Rajputana and, later,
in Sind. Twice in his account of Southern and Western India and once
in the _Life and Journeyings of Hiuen-Tsiang_, we are told that he
heard of a “Land of Western Women.” While on the Coromandel Coast,
he heard of an island inhabited by women who bore female children
only to Persian demons. Of old time, they were wont to allure sailors
and traders by signals. If successful, they changed themselves into
beautiful women, holding flowers and dispersing sweet scents. They
went forth to meet voyagers to the sound of sweet music, and, having
inveigled them into their City, which was built of iron, and having
solaced them with their society, they would cast them into an iron
prison and devour them at leisure. On the Western Coast, he is told
that the island is rich in gems and lies to the south-west of the
Byzantine Empire, to which it is tributary, and where its precious
stones are exchanged. It is inhabited by women only. Once a year, the
Emperor of Byzantium sends them male partners; and, if boys are born
of the union, the laws forbid their being brought up on the island.
Marco Polo also speaks of a Kingdom of Western Women. Ferdusi, the
Persian Poet, makes Alexander the Great visit an island-city of women
where no man was allowed to dwell. In the early art and literature of
Buddhism the legend is to be found. It reached Malaya. It made its
way into Chinese literature, too, some generations before the time of
Hiuen-Tsiang. But the locality given to the island varies with the
legend.

Here, surely, are our Homeric friends, the Sirens—the daughters of
Achelous, serpent and ox, and the Muse Calliope—whose “shrill music
reached Ulysses on the middle sea” from a little island off Sicily. Can
these Western and Eastern legends have come from a common source; or,
did they travel overland with trader or missionary; or was some faint
echo of the golden harp of Hellas wafted by the breezes which bore the
trader across the Arabian Sea to Sind and Southern India? Possibly
the latter; for our author speaks of the island as lying to the west,
beyond the great sea which laves the shores of Kutch. It is perplexing
to find what would seem to be the same story told by the natives of
Martinique to Columbus during his second voyage.

From Sind beyond the Indus, Hiuen-Tsiang proceeded to Multân in the
Punjâb, and saw the majestic temple of the Sun-dêva, whose image was
cast in gold and set with rare gems. Crowds of worshippers flocked
hither from other Kingdoms; and women did honour to the god with music
and torches and offerings of blossoms and perfumes. The temple was
surrounded with water-tanks and flowery groves; and near it was a
“House of Happiness,” which was a hospital for the poor and sick.

He visited this temple on his way back to the sacred land where Gautama
had assumed his mission of teacher of mankind; for he felt that he must
return thither. So he made a thousand miles eastward and arrived at
Magadha in time to see the grand procession of the ashes of Buddha. He
thought the remains too large to be genuine; so did an Indian sage of
great reputation, and it would seem that the crowd of spectators were
also in doubt. Some time afterwards, suddenly, the relics could not be
found; the _stûpa_ in which they were kept was a sheet of light, and
flames, in five different colours shot up to the sky. This brilliant
phenomenon was witnessed by a wondering multitude; it gradually passed
away; and so did incredulity.

Hiuen-Tsiang passed his time in the monasteries of Magadha, partly in
study, partly in refuting Brâhmans and the followers of the Little
Vehicle. To refute the latter could not have been a difficult task:
simple monks, only instructed in practical ethics, would stand no
chance against an erudite monk trained in subtle speculation and
fine distinctions. As in European Universities of the Middle Ages,
the thesis to be disputed was hung up by its supporter; and whatever
wrangler chose to deny it would take it down. Then a contest ensued;
and, at Nâlanda, its learned Head, the “Treasury of the Law,” was wont
to preside at great discussions. In some of these, our Chinaman took a
triumphant part.

On one occasion, a certain Brâhman had hung up a challenge to the
Buddhists, which consisted of 40 articles, and, according to custom,
he wagered his head to maintain them; possibly perfectly well aware
that, in the unexpected event of defeat, the forfeit would not be
exacted. For some days, no one would come forward to oppose him. Then
Hiuen-Tsiang sent a monk to take up the insolent challenge in his
name: it was torn into shreds, and trampled under foot. At the solemn
discussion which ensued, he held forth at portentous length, and
dumbfounded the Brâhman. Hiuen-Tsiang then told him he had suffered
humiliation enough: he was free to go.

The defeated wrangler went to Kâmarûpa, a Kingdom which extended
from west of the Brahmaputra to Manipur, on the borders of Burmah.
The eloquence and learning of our Chinaman would appear to have
converted the Brâhman, who was generous enough to tell the Râja of his
defeat. The tale so impressed that monarch that he sent an invitation
to Hiuen-Tsiang to pay him a visit; but our pilgrim, having fully
accomplished the purpose for which he had travelled so far, was eager
to return to China. The Râja waxed wroth at his disobedience to a
royal command, and warned the “Treasury of the Law” that, little as
he cared for the religion of Buddha, he would come with a vast army
and level with the dust the famous building over which he presided if
Hiuen-Tsiang were not forwarded without delay. It was evident that the
Râja, a powerful ally or tributary of Sîlâditya, whose loyalty to that
great monarch was not too assured, might conceivably let loose the
hounds of uncertain war. Here, a gleam of enlightenment is thrown on
the attitude of Râjas tributary to Sîlâditya, who had won his empire
by the sword and who had made Kanouj and Allahabad his capital cities.
Hiuen-Tsiang was despatched by Sîlabhadra to far-off Kâmarûpa; He had
been at the Râja’s court a whole month, when Sîlâditya returned from
the chastisement of a rebellious feudatory and learned whither he had
gone. Sîlâditya had urged the pilgrim to visit him in vain; now he
finds him at the court of a rival. Here is the making of a very pretty
quarrel. Sîlâditya sends to the Râja, saying that he wants the Chinese.
“My head first!” replies that monarch. Then Sîlâditya waxed wrath; and
his wrath is terrible. “Since I have power to cut off your head, it may
be given straightway to my ambassador,” is the message he returns. The
Râja of Kâmarûpa now begins to reflect. He orders his court-barge and
sets off with Hiuen-Tsiang in it to make amends to Sîlâditya.

But he took the precaution to be accompanied by a great army. The
Ganges was crowded with boats filled with troops, and, as these were
rowed up the stream, other soldiery mounted on war-elephants marched
slowly along the banks. On their arrival at the court of Sîlâditya
he commanded that Hiuen-Tsiang should be presented to him. The Râja
of Kâmarûpa saw at once that here was an opportunity of quietly
humiliating Sîlâditya in his turn—a monarch who, from conviction or
by policy, professed the deepest reverence for the Greater Vehicle
and was the munificent patron of Buddhist institutions. He suggested
to Sîlâditya that it would be unworthy of a monarch so renowned
for cherishing sages and saints to do otherwise than pay the holy
and learned Chinese pilgrim the compliment of visiting him first.
Sîlâditya fell in with the proposal; and the Râja at once went back to
Hiuen-Tsiang and persuaded him, “for the honour of the law of Buddha,”
to consent. Thus, should his enemy, or anyone, never be sensible of
so subtle a revenge, the secret of it was sweet in the heart of the
Eastern King; a psychological peculiarity by no means confined to the
ruler of Kâmarûpa.

Next evening, shortly after sunset, the Ganges was ablaze with torches;
the air resounded with the noise of tom-toms, for Sîlâditya was about
to pay his visit with Generals and Ministers of State. It was the
distinction of the Lord-paramount that the beating of a hundred gongs
heralded his approach and gave step to his guards. The haughty despot,
who determined the fate of thousands by a gesture, cast himself on
the ground at the feet of the humble monk, and kissed them. Next day,
the Master of the Law returned the visit. Now, a sister of the great
monarch, an enthusiast for high doctrine, who was seated behind the
throne, entreated that a great assembly of all the sages of the Empire
should be convoked at Kanouj to give Hiuen-Tsiang an opportunity of
setting out the beauty of the Greater Vehicle. So, at the beginning of
the cold season, the sages assembled at Kanouj, mounted on elephants
or carried in palanquins, surrounded by banners and accompanied by an
immense multitude. An elephant bore a golden statue of Buddha on his
back, and this was solemnly erected on a daïs. To the right of the
elephant, marched Sîlâditya, dressed as Indra and carrying a white
fly-flap in his hand; to the left was Kumâra, monarch of Kâmarûpa,
in the garb of Brâhm, and carrying a parasol of precious silk. Both
monarchs wore magnificent tiaras, from which garlands of flowers and
ribbons set with jewels hung down. Following the golden image and the
two Râjas came our Master of the Law, seated on a big elephant, and
then the officials and monks of the two Kingdoms, also on elephants.
Eighteen tributary princes were drawn up on either side, also riding
elephants, and these fell into the procession as the great Râjas and
Hiuen-Tsiang passed on.

Food was provided for everybody, without distinction of rank, and
rich gifts were bestowed on all the monks. Hiuen-Tsiang ordered his
thesis to be hung up; but eighteen days passed, and no one attempted
to controvert it. But the followers of the Little Vehicle were so
mortified that some of them conspired against Hiuen-Tsiang’s life. The
plot was detected, and a severe edict was issued that even the very
smallest slander against him would be punished by loss of tongue; while
any attempt to injure him bodily would be followed by decapitation. At
the end of the eighteen days, following ancient usage, the victorious
pilgrim was mounted on a richly-caparisoned elephant and taken a tour
round the crowd, in the company of the dignitaries of the Empire and
with full state-honours. Rich presents were offered him; but these he
refused; and then Sîlâditya dissolved the assembly; and the eighteen
kings, the monks, and the crowd returned every man to his own abode.

Now, it was the custom of Sîlâditya, as it had been that of his
predecessors, to distribute all their accumulated wealth at the end of
every five years. But they were careful to keep their war-elephants,
war-horses and weapons of war; for on these their power rested. The
practice kept the people submissive and contented, while effective
force remained with the Râja. The distribution was made on a plain at
the confluence of Ganges and Jumna, three miles from Prayâga, and not
far from the existing city of Allahabad. When the time for it arrived,
Sîlâditya took the Master of the Law with him. He observed that gold
and silver, silk and cotton, and much else were stored up in temporary
buildings within an enclosure, and arrangements were made for seating
a thousand persons at a time. The eighteen tributary Kings and a vast
crowd of monks and laity were summoned to be present, and did not fail
to arrive. It is significant that each tributary prince brought his
army with him: it throws light on the character of Sîlâditya’s empire.

On the first day, the statue of Buddha was installed in a temple and
adorned with jewels. A great feast followed on this ceremony; it was
accompanied by music and the scattering of blossoms; and then rich
gifts were distributed among the more important of the guests. On the
second day, the image of the Sun-god was honoured, and presents of
magnificence were made. The third day, the god Siva received honours,
and a similar distribution was made. The fourth day, every one of about
10,000 monks was given a hundred pieces of gold and a cotton garment.
The fifth day, distribution to the Brâhmans was begun; but it is worthy
of note that the awards to them took up three weeks all but a day. On
the sixth day, and for 9 days following, alms were given to “heretics”;
on the eighth, and for the next nine days, to naked mendicants from
distant Kingdoms. Lastly, it took a whole month to give to the poor, to
orphans, and to poor men who had no family to fall back upon. Finally
Sîlâditya took off and gave up his tiara and necklace, exclaiming that
he had exchanged them for incorruptible riches. And now, the tributary
Râjas surrendered their robes and jewels to their Lord-paramount. What
with this ordinance and the retention of the sinews of war, Sîlâditya
remained no less powerful than before.

Our pilgrim now obtains permission to set forth on his return-journey.
He is offered an escort to China should he choose to return by sea;
but he has precious manuscripts to preserve, the rich harvest of his
labours, and he prefers to take the smaller risk of desert and icy
mountains to that of pirates and of frail, clumsy craft, breasting “the
feasted waters of the sea stretched out In lazy gluttony, expecting
prey.” Moreover, whether T’ai Tsung, now Emperor of China, would
welcome a foreign Embassy, may have been in his mind. He refused all
gifts from the Râja of Kâmarûpa, save a warm garment needful for the
high passes.

Now, the Master of the Law had been wont, if he had no escort to
protect him, to send an attendant monk ahead, and, should his
fore-runner meet with wayside thieves, he would announce the character
of Hiuen-Tsiang’s mission. The explanation had been made more than
once, and prevailed. But many a Râja was now eager to give him a warm
welcome and send soldiery to see him safe in the next Kingdom. And,
Sîlâditya, not merely went with him some small part of the long way,
but charged a tributary prince of the North to accompany and protect
him through the Punjâb. He also presented the pilgrim with a big
elephant, horses and chariots to convey the manuscripts and images he
had collected, and 3000 pieces of gold and 10,000 pieces of silver to
defray the expenses of the journey. He also provided him with letters
to various princes whose territories he would have to cross, ordering
or recommending them to expedite his journey. These documents were
written on rolls of cotton and sealed with red wax. Sîlâditya and his
tributary Râjas even rode out again to catch the pilgrim up and bid him
a second farewell.

Easy progress was made across North-West India; and native rulers vied
with each other in doing honour to the traveller from afar. Now, at the
best of times, to cross the Indus is perilous; and this time it was not
effected without mishap. The “Master of the Law” rode on the elephant;
but the manuscripts, images, relics, and a precious collection of
seeds, which he had made during his travels, and which he hoped might
grow in China, were placed in a boat under the care of a special
custodian. When the middle of the current was reached, a storm-gust
swept over the river, and the boat was well nigh sunk by tossing waves.
The custodian was rescued with great difficulty; but half a hundred
manuscripts and the valuable collection of seeds which might have done
so much service, were lost. Only by the very greatest exertion was
anything at all saved.




CHAPTER V.

INDIAN SOCIAL LIFE IN THE SEVENTH CENTURY.


Once more we find Hiuen-Tsiang by the Kâbul river. Many years had
passed since he rested on its banks and entered India. Since that
time he had made himself a finished Sanskrit scholar; he had visited
three and a half score of States; he had traversed the whole breadth
and well-nigh the whole length of the great Peninsula; he had debated
the subtlest questions with the profoundest scholars and acutest
minds in India; he had been entertained by powerful princes as their
venerated guest. In every corner of a vast territory, he had met with
large hospitality at the hands of men of differing creeds; he had seen
many new things, strange and wonderful; more than once, his life had
been in jeopardy, and narrow indeed had been his escape; he had visited
every spot connected with the life of Gautama, from the scene where
Bôdhisattva “descended spiritually into the womb of his mother” to the
place where he became Buddha, and to the place of his death. He had
visited every spot sacred to Asôka-râja, the great promulgator of the
faith. It had been granted him to see the shadow of Buddha. And, above
all, he had not failed in his quest. Written on prepared palm-leaves
and carefully packed, were the so much lacking sacred scriptures; much
of them tales of the absurdest fantasy and most extravagant romance, it
is true; but the sympathetic eye can still discover in the fable the
mild and sweet moral teaching of the Buddhist faith.

In the _Si-yu-ki_ (Observations on Western Lands) there is a very full
account of India in the early Seventh Century. So long a residence in
that land, and such a wide knowledge of its various peoples as the
Master of the Law had acquired in personal intercourse with them makes
this invaluable. The work is preceded by a general description of the
Great Peninsula, which applies more particularly to that land, so
sacred to a Buddhist, which lies between the Jumna and the lower slopes
of the Himalayas. And, now that Hiuen-Tsiang is leaving India, it will
be well to know what he has to tell us concerning that vast region.

He begins by discussing the various names given to In-tu (India); for
each district is differently called. He gives its shape, extent and
climate. “The north is a continuation of mountains and hills, the
ground being dry and salt. On the east, there are valleys and plains,
which, being well-watered and cultivated, are fruitful and productive.
The southern district is wooded and herbaceous; the western parts are
stony and barren.”[3]

Indian measures of length and the Indian Calendar and seasons are next
described, and the author then goes on to treat of towns and buildings,
seats and clothing, dress and habits, ablutions, language and
literature, schools, castes, marriages, kings, troops, weapons, manners
and customs, administration of laws, ceremonial observances, revenues,
natural products, and commercial dealings—all in systematized order.
The lapse of thirteen centuries; conquest by Mohammedan and European
invaders; and Mohammedan and Brahmanistic oppression would appear to
have altered but little the ways and external appearance of Indian life
since Hiuen-Tsiang’s time. He tells us that “the walls of towns are
wide and high; the streets and lanes, tortuous; the roads, winding; the
thoroughfares, dirty; the stalls, arranged on both sides of the road
and furnished with appropriate signs. Butchers, fishermen, dancers,
executioners, scavengers and their like dwell outside the city. Coming
and going these people must keep to the left side of the road.” The
city-walls are of brick, but their towers are made of wood or bamboo;
the houses are plastered with cob, “mixed with cow-dung for purity”;
they are provided with wooden balconies, coated with mortar and shaded
by tiles. The roofs are of rushes, branches, tiles, or boards. It
is a habit to scatter flowers before the house. The _sarighârâmas_,
or monasteries, are very cleverly built in quadrangles, ornamented
with dome-shaped buildings of two or three stories at the corners of
each quadrangle, and joists and beams are adorned with carving; there
is much decoration and mural painting; the cells being plain on the
outside only.

Everybody takes his rest on a mat of one uniform size, but of various
degrees of ornamentation; but the Râja has an imposing throne, studded
with gems, and nobles use painted and enriched seats. The garb is of
pure white silk or cotton or hemp or goat’s hair, uncut to fit the
body and wound round the waist, gathered up under the armpits, and
then slung across the body to the right. There is quaint humour in our
pilgrim’s observation that “some of the men shave their moustaches and
have other odd customs”: one thinks of the strange appearance of some
of our long-shore men.

Women keep their shoulders covered, and their robes reach the ground.
Their hair is knotted up on the crown; otherwise it hangs loose. They
wear crowns and caps and flower-wreaths on the head, and necklaces of
jewels.

In North India, where the climate is colder, close-fitting garments are
worn. Some non-believers wear peacock-feathers, or necklaces made of
the bones of the skull; some cover their nakedness with leaf or bark,
or go bare. Some pull out the hair; others wear their whiskers bushy
and braid their hair.

The monks wear three different kinds of dress, either red or yellow in
colour. Merchants, for the most part, go bare-footed, stain the teeth
red or black, bind up the hair, and pierce the nose for the wearing of
ornaments there. Everybody is very cleanly, washing before eating,
never eating of a dish served twice over, never passing the dish on.
Wooden and stone vessels are destroyed after use; metal ones are
polished. The teeth are cleansed with a willow-stick after eating; the
hands and mouth are washed; and folk do not touch one another until
these duties are carried out. The body is washed after attending to
the calls of nature, and then perfumes are used. The bath is taken
before religious functions, and also at the time when the King washes
himself. Each province keeps its own record of events. Education is
begun early. Young Buddhists are put to the study of the five Vidyâs,
or treatises on grammar, progressively; first come the principles of
mechanics; then elements of medicine and drugs and the use of charms;
then the principles of right-doing and the distinction between the
true and the false; and, finally, the various “vehicles” of the faith.
Brâhmans are trained on similar lines by skilled teachers. Some “rise
above mundane rewards, and are as insensible to renown as to contempt
of the world.... Rulers value men of reputation highly; but are unable
to draw them to court.” But the thirst of others for honour leads them
on in the search for wisdom, and, if they finish their education at
thirty, they seek for occupation. Some Brâhmans are devoid of virtuous
principles, and waste their substance in riotous excess. Unhappily
the Buddhist schools are not without reproach: “they are constantly
at variance, and their contentious utterances swell like the waves of
an angry sea”; yet, “in various directions, they do aim at one end.”
Knowledge of sacred books and successful exegesis are rewarded by
successive grades of distinction, beginning with exemption from control
and leading up to the possession of “an elephant-carriage,” and even to
a “surrounding escort.” A successful disputant, like Hiuen-Tsiang, is
mounted on an elephant (as he was), the animal is completely covered
over with precious ornaments, and the rider is conducted by a numerous
suite to the gates of the convent. But woe betide the unhappy wretch
who proves himself a fool at these mental wrestling bouts; “his face
is painted red and white; he is bedaubed with dust and dirt, and then
borne off to some deserted spot, or cast into a ditch!” For slight
faults a monk is only reprimanded; for graver offences, silence is
enforced; for a great fault, he is cast out of the convent to find a
home for himself and take up some kind of work, or he may wander about
the roads.

We are told next about the four great castes, The Brâhman, or
hereditary priest takes precedence of the Kshattriya or military
descendents of the Aryan conquerors, a caste which rules, and observes
human kindliness. Next come the traders (Vaiśyas); fourth is the Sûdra,
the caste of tillers of the soil. When one marries, he takes social
position according as he preserves or impairs purity of caste. Widows
may not marry again.

“The succession of Râjas is confined to the Kshattriya caste, who have
from time to time achieved power by means of usurpation and bloodshed.”
The army of the Râja is one of the many separate hereditary castes of
India. In times of peace, it is garrisoned around the Râja’s palace.
In each Indian army are elephants, protected by strong armour, and the
tusks capped with sharp metal. A general issues his command from a car,
driven by two attendants, between whom he sits, and is drawn by four
horses abreast. The generals of the foot soldiers also ride in cars and
are protected by a guard. An attack is met by the cavalry, who also
carry orders. The infantry is very brave. It is armed with spear and
shield, bows and arrows, swords, axes, slings and many other weapons of
ancient usage.

Hiuen-Tsiang speaks of the common people in the highest terms. As
Wheeler remarks they “would almost appear to have been a different race
from the modern Hindus. They had not yet been moulded into existing
forms by ages of Brahmanical repression and Musselman tyranny; and they
bore a stronger resemblance to the unsophisticated Buddhists of modern
Burma than to the worshippers of Vishnu and Siva.”[4] Our traveller
admits that they are volatile, but “gentle and sweet, straight-forward,
honourable, keeping their word, with no fraud, treachery or deceit
about them.” Criminals are rare, and these few are not even beaten,
and are never put to death, but cast into prison and left to live or
die, “not being counted among men.” A small payment is exacted for a
small offence; but those who seriously offend the moral sense of the
community are mutilated in various ways, or expelled from it. Frank
confession is followed by punishment proportioned to the offence; but
denial, or attempt to wriggle out, is met by trial by ordeal. Of this
there are four kinds:—1, The accused person is put into one sack and a
stone into another; both sacks are tied together and thrown into deep
water: If the man sinks lowest, he is deemed guilty. 2, The accused has
to stand or sit on red hot iron, or to handle it, or have it applied to
his tongue: If no scars result, he is deemed innocent. 3, He is weighed
against a stone: If he weighs it down, he is innocent. 4, An incision
is made in the right thigh of a ram, and all manner of poisons and some
food of the accused are put into the wound. Should the ram survive, the
man is innocent. “The way of crime is blocked by these four methods.”
It is obvious to us that the issue of every one of these ordeals could
be manipulated in the interests of justice, or against them.

We are next told of etiquette, and are informed that no less than nine
ways of being polite are employed. Of these, the most respectful is to
cast one’s self on the ground, and then to kneel “and laud the virtues
of the one you address.” When one of inferior rank receives orders, he
lifts the skirt of his superior, and casts himself on the ground. The
“honourable person thus reverenced must speak gently to the inferior,
and touch his head, or pat him on the back, and give him kindly orders
or good advice, in order to show affection.”

When ill, there is no rush to the physic-bottle. “Everyone who falls
sick, fasts for seven days. Should he not get well in the course of
this period, he takes medicine.” Hiuen-Tsiang causes us no surprise
when he informs us that “doctors differ in their modes of treatment.”

At funerals there are weepings and lamentable cries, rending of
garments and beatings of head and breast. No one takes food in a house
where someone has died until after the funeral; and all who have been
at the death-bed are unclean until they have bathed outside the town.
Those who desire release from life “receive a farewell meal at the
hands of relatives or friends,” and then are put into a boat amid
strains of music; and this is shot into mid-Ganges, “where such persons
drown themselves.” Sometimes, but rarely, one of these may be seen on
the banks, not yet quite dead.

Hiuen-Tsiang speaks of the civil administration as being mild and
benevolent. Officials have “a portion of land assigned to them for
their personal support.” There is neither registration of families nor
forced labour. Râjas possess their own private domains, divided into
four portions; whereof one provides for state-matters and the cost of
sacrifices; one, for salaries; one, for rewarding men of exceptional
talent; and the fourth affords charity to religious bodies. By this
arrangement taxation is light, and the personal service required is
moderate, labour at public works being paid for. “Everyone keeps his
own belongings in tranquillity; and all till the ground for food.
Those who cultivate the royal estate pay a sixth part of the produce
as tribute.” There is a light tax payable on travel by river and at
barriers across the roadways.

Such people as smell of onion and garlic are thrust out of the
town. The usual food is simple, consisting of milk, cream, butter,
sugar-candy, corn cakes and mustard. Fish, mutton and venison are
eaten; other flesh is prohibited. Brâhmans and warriors drink
unfermented syrup of the grape; but the trading caste indulges in
strong drink. Rich and poor eat precisely the same food, but out of
very different vessels, both as to material and cost. They eat with the
fingers, and have no spoon, cup, or chopstick.

Hiuen-Tsiang tells us that he found India divided into 70 Kingdoms.
Nine centuries before his time Megasthenes the Greek Ambassador,
found twice as many. In spite of the many political settlements which
have had their day and vanished, some of the territories described by
Hiuen-Tsiang are divisions corresponding to natural features, race,
language, and religious customs, and remain distinct districts, each
of them with its idiosyncrasies to-day. Consolidation by successive
conquests has taken place, it is true, but the village persists.
The village-settlements were there before the Aryan conquest; they
have survived the long passage of time; they carry on their ancient
tradition, and have maintained provincial characteristics against the
pressure of the Mohammedan, the Mahrattan, and all other attempts at
organic Empire.




CHAPTER VI.

THE JOURNEY HOME BY A NEW AND PERILOUS ROUTE.


We left our hero on the Kâbul river, beyond the boundaries of India:
a royal reception awaited him at Kapiśa, and a hundred experienced
men were chosen to conduct and protect him in the passage across the
Hindû Kûsh. The shortest, but most difficult of the passes—probably
the Khawak, which reaches 13,000 feet, was selected. Seven days of
travel brought the party to those snow-mountains of which Hiuen-Tsiang
always speaks with mingled wonder, fear and dislike. Born and brought
up in a mild climate, and having now spent many years in a hot one, he
describes the discomforts and dangers of every high pass at length.
He tells us how wild and perilous are the precipices; how fearsome,
contorted, and difficult the path. Of the Hindû Kûsh he writes: “Now
the traveller is in a profound valley; now aloft on a high peak, with
its burthen of ice in full summertide. One gets along by cutting steps
in the ice, and, in three days one reaches the summit of the pass.
There, a furious icy blast, cold beyond measure, sweeps on; the valleys
are laden with accumulated snow. The traveller pushes on; for he dares
not pause. Soaring birds must needs alight; it is impossible for them
to fly; and they have to cross afoot. One gazes down on mountains that
look like hillocks.” The whole cavalcade had to dismount and clamber
up with the aid of mountain-staves. One wonders how the guides got
the elephant over such ridges; but they did. “Great men lived before
Agamemnon”; Hannibal solved the same problem two hundred years before
Christ.

At the end of the second week a large village of a hundred families
was reached, the inhabitants of which lived by rearing a very big
variety of sheep, which is said still to be found in this district.
Here the “Master of the Law” secured the services of a local guide, and
took a whole day’s rest. His escort now returned; and he set forth in
the middle of the night, mounted on a camel accustomed to the hills,
and attended by seven priests, twenty servants, the elephant which
Sîlâditya had given him, six asses, and four horses. Next morning the
bottom of the pass was reached; but there still lay before them what,
in the distance, looked like a snow-peak. But when they had ascended
a long zig-zag path and come up to it, it turned out to be mere white
rock. None the less, it towered far above the clouds, and the icy wind
there blew so hard and cutting that headway could hardly be made.

The descent of the range occupied five or six days. The route now
lay north westward to the Upper Oxus. Hiuen-Tsiang rested a month in
the camp of a petty Khân,—and then joined a caravan of traders who
were eastward bound. The caravan took a meandering course through
several little Khânates; and in one of them the Master of the Law
was struck by the singular head-gear of the women. They wore caps
three feet high, topped by two peaks of unequal length, if both
father-in-law and mother-in-law were living. The higher and lower
respectively represented these relatives. But, when one of them died,
the corresponding peak was removed; should both of them be dead, no
peaks were worn. This region was mountainous, and its inhabitants were
remarkable for their surpassing ugliness. They differed from all other
peoples in the peculiar blue-green of the iris. They were innocent of
all manners, and knew no law of justice; the horse was their study and
care, and they reared a breed of sturdy little ponies.

The caravan now followed the narrowing stream of Oxus, and, after a
time, ascended to the great plateau of the Pamirs, no less lofty than
the topmost Pyrenees. “There even in summer” says the Pilgrim “one
suffers from squalls and eddies of snowstorm. Just a few wretched
plants manage to root in ground that is almost always frozen. No
grain will sprout and no trace of man is to be found in all this vast
solitude.” But he came across a species of ostrich, a bird “ten feet
high,” of which he had previously been shown the eggs which were “as
big as small pitchers.”

The central valley of the Pamirs along which the caravan advanced, led
to difficult snow-passes of the Kizil Yart range, the highest peak of
which soars to 26,000 feet. Having forced a way over ice and through
snow, the long descent of the Eastern slopes was nearly at an end when
a band of brigands was observed to be on the look out for prey. The
traders fled, helter skelter, up the hill-side; and the robbers charged
furiously at their laden elephants, several of which they killed,
while others were drowned in trying to get across the torrents from
the mountains. It was probably at this time that Hiuen-Tsiang lost his
elephant. The thieves were soon fully occupied with their booty; the
traders seized the opportunity, drew together again, and proceeded,
with what goods they had been able to save, towards Kâshgar.

At Kâshgar the same custom obtained as at Kutchê: “When a child is
born the head is compressed by a wooden board.” The people are “fierce
and impetuous and most of them are deceitful and indifferent to polite
manners and learning. They paint their bodies and eyelids.” But they
show real skill in the making of hair-cloth and finely woven carpets.
More than six hundred years later, Marco Polo travelled along the
caravan route through Kâshgar and by Lob-Nor to China.

At Yârkand he was told that Arhats, (very purified and wise men),
“those who had obtained the holy fruit and were no longer bound by
worldly influences” “displaying their spiritual power, coming from afar
(that is, from India), abode here at rest.”

Arrived at Khotan, he found it a land of song and dance. Fa-Hian also
describes the inhabitants as being, in his time, “lovers of religious
music.”

It would seem that the caravan in which Hiuen-Tsiang travelled was
bound for Kau-chang, that land of the Uïghurs whose Khân-paramount had
tried to detain him “for the better instruction of his subjects.” Now
Khotan was tributary to this despot; and as the Master of the Law had
no desire to go out of his direct way home, or to be detained again,
not to speak of another hunger-strike, he wrote the Khân a politic
letter, wherein he recounted the perils he had undergone and the
successful issue of his sacred mission. Yet, an elephant which bore the
burthen of many scriptures had been drowned on the way home; but the
writings were saved. Would the Great Khân grant him a convoy?

It took six or seven months for a reply to arrive; and Hiuen-Tsiang
filled up the time in expounding sacred writings to the Khân of
Khotan and his subjects. When the answer came from Kau-chang, it was
favourable; the Khân of Khotan was permitted to furnish the Master of
the Law with transport for his treasures.

Fully a thousand miles still lay before him, and the painful desert
known to modern geographers as the Takla Makan must be crossed. The
route pursued was a very tortuous one, south of the great lake Lob-nor
(which lies between 2,000 and 3,000 feet above the sea-level), and
north of the Altyn-Tag mountains, which are the northern buttresses
of the great plateau of Thibet. He passed by ancient cities of
Eastern Khotan, once flourishing, now buried by drifting sands. Mere
mounds marked their sites.[5] Going East “we enter a great desert of
shifting sands, which are as a vast flood, driven hither and thither
by the wind. There is no track; and, without guide or indication,
travellers get bewildered and are lost. So the bones of beasts (which
have perished) are piled up to serve as beacons. Neither water nor
herb is to be found, and hot winds, which are frequent, befog the mind
and muddle the memory of man and beast, and make them ill and feeble.
Sometimes one hears plaintive notes and piteous lamentations, and men
get confused and know not whither they are going. Hence, many a life is
lost. And all is the work of demons and evil spirits.” All travellers
in deserts speak of the weird noises, which we now know to be due to
the shifting of the sand-ridges.[6]

And now, after sixteen years of pilgrim travel, after visiting a
hundred and ten different States, and journeying some twenty thousand
miles, Hiuen-Tsiang is drawing near his native land. He bears with
him five hundred grains of relics, reputed to belong to the body of
Tathâgarta (Gautama Buddha); one hundred and twenty-four works of
the Great Vehicle; five hundred and twenty other volumes, borne by
twenty-two horses; and six images of Buddha, in gold or silver or
sandal-wood. In the appeal for transport sent to Kau-chang, he had
written: “Notwithstanding differences in climate and mode of life;
and notwithstanding perils beyond count which have menaced me in my
journeying, I thank Heaven that nowhere did I come to harm. Reverence,
beyond all limit, has been done to me; my body has suffered no ill; and
I have fulfilled all that I vowed to accomplish.”

But his body _had_ suffered ill. The terrible ordeal of crossing
ice-bound ranges left its mark: it weakened his robust constitution and
shortened his life.

At the Chinese frontier, waggons and men were obtained, and the escort
from Khotan returned. T’ai Tsung, the great warrior statesman, now sat
on the throne he had won for his father, and to him “The Master of the
Law” announced his return. Emperor, Mandarins, Priests, and People
made ready to receive the great pilgrim with plaudit and parade such as
Western reserve bestows only on the victor in some scene of slaughter,
or on the inheritor of some soiled circlet and blood-stained robe.

The great day arrived. It was as if all China were present, so
crushing were the crowds. The Sacred Writings were taken in state to
the “Convent of the Great Bliss.” (Later they were transferred to a
“Convent of Beneficence,” specially constructed to contain them.)
High dignitaries led the way; marvellous wind-instruments discoursed
astounding music; priests in thousands chanted hymns; banners and
brilliantly-coloured rugs floated in the wind. A procession of the
most varied character, miles long, passed through the narrow, crowded
streets, which were lined by rows of flower-scatterers and less poetic,
but even more desirable, perfume burners. To the irreverent European
mind, the record of this Eastern parade in the Seventh Century suggests
a highly variegated travelling-circus; and the brow is involuntarily
raised when we come to the royal harem and its enthusiastic ladies
welcoming the return of the monk and the arrival of yet more ascetic
doctrine. The best of us is but human, and it is evident from the
narrative that, true saint as he was, the “Master of the Law” none the
less thoroughly enjoyed the recognition of his great merits, and made
little objection to the honours he received.




CHAPTER VII.

PEACEFUL DAYS.


At intervals an order came from T’ai-Tsung and his successor to appear
within the green enclosure which surrounded the Imperial Throne. It
was by Imperial command that the world possesses Hiuen-Tsiang’s report
of the States he had visited and of eighteen other States of which he
believed himself to have gathered authentic information. The work, as
already stated, is full of the absurd, fantastic fables of corrupted
Buddhism, related at full length and with perfervid unction; but it is
also a record of observation so close, systematic, and even scientific,
and of a will so firm-set and bold, that it is surpassed in no age
by any record of travel whatsoever. But there is little of personal
narrative in it. Now, Hiuen-Tsiang had lost full command of his native
language during so many years of residence among alien peoples, and it
was found necessary to get a Chinese stylist to redact his “Account of
Western Countries” (“_Si-yu-ki_”). This was done, in the main, from
notes which the pilgrim had brought back with him.

When the “Master of the Law” had finished this big undertaking, he
returned to work that had been interrupted by it—the collating,
translating and editing of the books he had brought with him. He was
accustomed to eat a slight breakfast at dawn, and to lecture to the
monks (_Sramans_) of his convent during the next four hours on some
canonical book or religious treatise. When this task was done, he would
go on with translation, marking out a certain portion for the day’s
task; but, if he had not finished this by night-fall, he usually sat on
until it was ended. He was scrupulous in his efforts to restore corrupt
text to its pristine purity; and one would always find him fully
occupied. Yet he always made time to discuss religious matters with
the sages who visited him. “When he had penetrated some profundity,
got light on some obscure passage, or amended some corrupt reading, it
seemed as if some divine being had come to his aid.... When expounding,
he was wont to become impassioned and his voice swelled out.” He had
the great gift of a convincing manner.

One is glad that his biographers did not neglect to describe his
personal appearance and other details of a similar kind. “His face,”
they say, “had a little colour to it; it was radiant and gracious; his
bearing, grave and stately. His voice was clear and penetrating; and
one never got weary of listening to him; for his words were noble,
elegant, and congenial. Often a distinguished guest would listen to
him for half a day with rapt attention. He liked to wear a garment of
fine cotton, of a length suited to his height, which was 7 _tchi_.[7]
He walked with even steps, and as one at ease. He looked you straight
in the face; there was never a hint of side-glance. He kept strict rule
and was always the same man. Nobody could rival him for warmth and
kindness of heart and gentle pity, ardour, and inviolate observance of
the Law. He was slow in making friends, and reserved in intercourse
with those that he made. Once within the gates of his monastery,
nothing but an Imperial decree could make him budge.”

Yet, on one occasion, he paid a visit to his native village. Only one
feeble old sister was left of all his family. He went with her to the
graves of their parents; it is said to clear them of weeds which had
overgrown them; but probably also to restore the few bones he had taken
with him on his pilgrimage. His parents perished during the time of
bloody civil strife, and their remains were hastily buried in a mean
grave; so he obtained Imperial permission to carry them to a better
resting-place. Thousands of monks and laity came to honour the father
and mother of the “Master of the Law.”

When Hiuen-Tsiang was a little more than 60, the hardships of travel
and the intense application of his latter years told on him; health
rapidly failed him. “I have come to the end of my work on this sacred
book,” said he to a disciple, “and also I have come near to the end
of my life. Bury me in a simple, quiet way. Wrap my body in a mat and
bear it to some lonely, hushful valley, far from any palace (_sic_) or
convent; for so impure a carcass as mine should not be near either.”
His disciples were disturbed at his condition and wept bitterly; they
tried to persuade him that he was mistaken as to the approach of death.
“I know myself,” he replied; “How can you enter into my intuition?” The
weakness increased, “The moment of departure is at hand,” he told them.
“Already my soul gives way and seems to leave me. Sell my clothes and
belongings without delay, and turn the money into images (of Buddha),
and tell the monks to pray.” He lay stiff and still for days, taking
no food. At last, when asked if he felt sure of reaching the goal of
his desires, he answered “Yes” in a weak voice. In a few moments he
was dead; yet his face retained its rosy colour and suggested supreme
happiness. He was 65 years of age.

He had begged for a simple funeral. He was buried in pomp; and there
was an immense giving of alms at his grave-side. His wish was so far
respected, however, that his remains were ultimately carried to a
reposeful spot in a tranquil valley.

Hwui-Lih, one of Hiuen-Tsiang’s disciples, whom he had employed in
translation, had gone far in writing a biography of the Master from his
notes and conversation, when his labours were interrupted by death.
Yen-Tsong, another devoted disciple took up the uncompleted work; he
collected and put the manuscripts of Hiuen-Tsiang and Hwui-Lih in
order, corrected the blunders and imperfections of Hwui-Lih’s five
volumes, and expanded them into ten volumes; which Monsieur Julien
translated into French many years ago. M. Julien condensed the later
and less interesting part of the biography, for the complete work was
too voluminous and too full of flowery periods to be worth the labour
of full translation; and even with this abridgement, much of the work,
like the _Si-yu-ki_, remains tedious reading. There is also a much
abbreviated translation into English by Dr. Samuel Beal.

Yet, the work is an imperishable monument to a great mind. When, here
and there, one suspects a little of that chastened self-inflation from
which few, if any, saints have been exempt; and when one has made due
allowance for the natural desire of two enthusiastic disciples to
offer innumerable flowers of Chinese rhetoric at the tomb of a beloved
Master, the fact remains that his lofty mind and gentle, yet ardent,
character, secured their deep reverence and commanded their devotion.
This affords further evidence of that personal attraction, the effects
of which we have so often observed in the record of his pilgrimage.
We may justly apply to this ancient Chinaman the happy phrase of John
Lyly, the Euphuist, and say of him that his soul was “stitched to the
starres.”




II.—SÆWULF, AN ENGLISH PILGRIM TO PALESTINE A.D. 1102




CHAPTER I.

EARLY PILGRIMAGE TO PALESTINE.


Very soon after Hiuen-Tsiang set forth on his arduous enterprise,
Jerusalem witnessed a remarkable scene (A.D. 629). Heraclius, Emperor
of New Rome, had overthrown the hosts of Chosroes II, the Persian,
and now he marched on foot through streets which that monarch had so
lately ravaged and shorn of half their population. A spirit of devout
and humble thankfulness possessed Heraclius and his chastened people.
The imperial feet were naked; the imperial shoulders bore the weight of
that True Cross which the aged Helena, mother of Constantine the Great,
had so significantly discovered, and which Chosroes had carried away
from the Church of the Holy Sepulchre.

Long before the True Cross was miraculously found, pious Christians
were wont to visit the sacred scenes of their Faith; but, after that
event, Pilgrimage became fashionable. Not the devout only thronged
to the Holy Land, and crowded all its many sanctified spots. The
inhabitants of Palestine were not slow to provide for the satisfaction
of the pilgrim; whether he were of the eager faithful, burning to
behold the burial places of Patriarchs and the very spot associated
with some scene of the Gospels; or were one moved by a love of novelty
and excitement. Tradition was revived, or legend invented; a vast
number of sacred relics was hit upon and produced; hostelries became
scenes of piety, and, alas! often of dissipation.

Many, if not most, of the travellers were undoubtedly impelled by
a genuine spirit of reverence; but pilgrimages have always been
popular because, under the sanction of Religion, they afforded the
excitement of mild adventure and the physical and mental exhilaration
which accompanies change of scene. As is always the case when men
gather together from many lands and find themselves released from the
restraints of home and the specified conventions of country, many were
pliant to the allurements of pleasure. Indeed, Jerusalem was soon
turned into a theatre of the passions, a centre of wild dissipation,
and even of serious crime. Gregory of Nyssa, St. Jerome, and St.
Augustine, set themselves against the fashionable craze, and told
would-be pilgrims that they might do far better by remaining at home
and praising God in whatsoever station he had assigned to them.

When Jerusalem fell to the onrush of the Arabs (A.D. 637), the
Moslem conquerors regarded it as a sacred city; for they believed
Mohammed to have been transported thence to visit Paradise. Christian
subjects and Christian pilgrims added to Mohammedan wealth; and
they were allowed, under restrictions, to dwell in or to visit the
Holy Land. Haroun-Al-Raschid, Caliph of Bagdad, and Charlemagne,
Emperor of the West, were drawn together by the political antagonism
of Constantinople alike to the Saracen and to an upstart Empire.
They exchanged gifts; and the traveller may still see some of those
sent by Haroun-Al-Raschid, as well as much else that is curious or
beautiful, in the Treasury of the great Church which Charlemagne
built at Aix-la-Chapelle. Bernard, one of three Benedictine monks who
visited the Holy Land A.D. 870, says that Christians there enjoyed such
security that if, by some accident, a traveller should lose a beast
of burden on the road, he might leave his belongings where they lay,
proceed to the nearest city for assistance, and find them untouched on
his return.

When the great Empire of the Abassides crumbled and fell, the Fatimite
Caliphs of Cairo were usually tolerant of infidels, who increased
their wealth and power. Commercial relations with the Christian West
continued; and pilgrims flocked to the Holy Land. In the tenth century,
that darkest of the Dark Ages, John of Parma visited Palestine no fewer
than seven times; and even far-off Iceland sent its pilgrims.

But in the eleventh century (A.D. 1074) the Seljuk Turk swept down
from the Oxus, and, aided by Emirs in revolt, took Jerusalem. The main
body of the Turkish army retained the barbarous habits of a nomadic
people; they lusted for battle; they were drunk with blood. Palestine
became the scene of exaction, of debauchery, and of every kind of
licence and excess. Churches were ransacked for spoil; the rich pilgrim
was subject to threat and compelled to disgorge much of his wealth
before he was allowed to see Jerusalem; the poor pilgrim, already worn
down by privation and suffering in some diminutive crazy craft, met,
on landing, with insult and outrage. Neither Mohammedan Cairo nor
Christian Constantinople were strong enough to deal with the Turk:
he exhibited Moslem fanaticism at its worst. The Scimitar had indeed
displaced the Cross.




CHAPTER II. “DIEU LE VEULT.”


One of the eye-witnesses of the wretchedness of Christians in Palestine
was a certain Peter, a man from Picardy; high-strung; one to whom
a very varied experience brought no satisfaction. His restless
disposition had driven him into the profession of arms; he had sought
for peace in study; he had tried the companionship of a wife, who had
borne him the boon of children; his spirit found no tranquility among
cloistered monks; he fled to the greater seclusion of a hermitage.
There visions left his soul still unsatisfied, and he went to the Holy
Land. The sufferings of Christians at the hands of the Turk filled him
with spiritual fury. He returned to Europe, and with inextinguishable
zeal, traversed its western half to urge in impassioned eloquence,
which made every heart throb and frenzied every mind, the union of all
Christendom for the destruction of the Turk and the re-establishment of
the True Faith in its first home.

He set Europe ablaze. Fourteen generations of Christians had grieved
over the Moslem occupation of the Holy Land. John Zimiskes, the
ablest and most popular of Byzantine generals, had carried his arms
as far as Lebanon in the year 975, and had recovered what were said
to be the shoes of the Saviour and the hair of John the Baptist. But,
contrary to the vainglorious assertions of Byzantine historians, he
was unable to penetrate into Palestine. In 1073, Hildebrand, the great
Pope-Statesman, was anxious to deliver the Holy Places; but any project
that he may have formed came to naught; for the Head of the Holy Roman
Empire was bent on subordinating the Church to his Imperial Will; and
the Head of the Church was even more resolute in his resolve to make
the Papacy independent and supreme. About this time, German prelates
headed 7,000 pilgrims, of whom only 2,000 survived to see their home
once more. The conquest of Jerusalem remained a dream until Peter the
Hermit awoke the sleeper.

But now Urban II responded to his call, and summoned and presided over
the famous Council of Clermont in Auvergne. “God wills it,” shouted
the assembly; “a truce of God” was declared; private war and princely
quarrels appeared to be forgotten; and all Western Europe prepared for
a Crusade.

The barons were undoubtedly captive to a great idea, and their zeal
was sincere. But little of any human action is due to a single motive.
Remission of sin was promised to those who should assume the Cross;
and love of battle, the charm of novelty, and the desire of acquiring
large and lucrative fiefs in the Holy Land also played their part.
The imagination of the common people, so lively and virile, often
so spiritual and exalted in the Middle Ages, was no less fired than
that of the barons. The spirit which directed men to the cloister now
summoned them to the camp. A belief that God had decreed the expulsion
of the Turk, and would protect and direct them to the capture of the
Holy City, filled all men with fanatic fervour. The sound of clarion
and trumpet and the clash of arms mingled with the voice of the
preacher exhorting seigneur and serf. To men of the eleventh century,
the curtains of the Unseen were often withdrawn, and the splendour of
God shone forth, or devils appeared, comely to tempt, or distorted
to terrify. Guibert tells us that, while at Beauvais, he noticed, at
mid-day, a few clouds stretched a little obliquely athwart others, and
“All at once, thousands of voices from every quarter cried out that a
cross had appeared in the sky.”

But, as with the barons, motives other than religious also moved the
populace and favoured the Crusade. Private war had been unceasing;
famine and pestilence, the attendants on war, had desolated Europe;
the serf lay prostrate under the heel of his exacting seigneur. There
would be release from these evils in that land which the Redeemer of
Mankind had chosen to be the scene of his birth and Sacrifice.

The wave of enthusiasm struck our own shores, and passed beyond
them. William of Malmesbury says in his “Chronicles of the Kings of
England” that, “there was no nation so remote, no people so retired,
as not to contribute its portion.” This ardent love not only inspired
the continental provinces, but even all who had heard the name of
Christ, whether in the most distant islands, or savage countries. The
Welshman left his hunting; the Scot his fellowship with lice; the Dane
his drinking party; the Norwegian his raw fish. Lands were deserted
of their husbandmen; houses of their inhabitants; even whole cities
migrated. There was no regard to relationship; affection to their
country was held in little esteem; God alone was placed before their
eyes. Whatever was stored in granaries, or hoarded in chambers, to
answer the hopes of the avaricious husbandman, or the covetousness of
the miser, all, all was deserted; they hungered and thirsted after
Jerusalem alone. Joy attended such as proceeded; while grief oppressed
those who remained. But why do I say remained? You might see the
husband departing with his wife; indeed, with all his family; you
would smile to see the whole household laden on a carriage, about to
proceed on their journey. The road was too narrow for the passengers,
the path too confined for the travellers, so thickly were they thronged
with endless multitudes. A French eye-witness tells us that “thieves
and evil-doers of all kinds cast themselves at the feet of priests
to receive the cross.... The rustic shod his oxen like horses; the
children on approaching any large town or castle would ask: ‘is that
Jerusalem?’”

These undisciplined hordes became turbulent; their march was marked
by famine, pillage and murder. The few who reached Asia Minor were
exterminated.

Macaulay’s “schoolboy” knows the story of the disciplined army of the
First Crusade; how, after the Caliph of Cairo had wrested Jerusalem
from the weakened Turk and offered peace and security to Christians in
vain, the slow advance of the invaders, marked by incredible cruelty
on both sides, was so far successful that the crusading barons and
their followers hurled themselves against the Holy City and took
it (A.D. 1099). “Even civilization always bears a brute within its
bosom,” remarks Sainte-Beuve; and assuredly Mediæval Religion made
small attempt to caste out the devils that made the Cross their screen.
The loftiest passions are often unstable; the enthusiasm of the crowd
readily passes from mood to mood. The fervour of faith became the
frenzy of carnage. Raymond of Agiles, an eye-witness, declares that the
Mosque of Omar and its portals ran blood up to the knees and even so
far as to the reins of the horses. For seven days, Jerusalem was given
up to slaughter and pillage.

Yet, in spite of a campaign tarnished with shame and dyed with guilt,
the Christian ideal had not wholly disappeared. The growing spirit of
Chivalry was not wanting, nor was the Norman genius for statesmanship
absent. At the famous “Assizes of Jerusalem,” a code of laws was drawn
up better than the Middle Ages had yet known. But after Baldwin was
crowned at Bethlehem (A.D. 1100), the new Kingdom remained unsettled.
Neither Christian nor Saracen was likely to forget the atrocities of
war; the whole of Palestine was far from being subdued; a few parts
were still held by the Infidel; the paths to Jerusalem were still
perilous for the pilgrim; but once again the Holy City and other sacred
places were under Christian rule. The enthusiasm and joy of Western
Europe ran high. The tide of pilgrimage at once set in, and an obscure
Englishman was one of the first pilgrims to reach Jerusalem.




CHAPTER III. SÆWULF’S RECORD.


There is preserved in the library of Corpus Christi College, Cambridge,
a valuable collection of ancient manuscripts presented by an old pupil
of the College, who was no other than Matthew Parker, Archbishop of
Canterbury in the reign of Queen Elizabeth. Among these manuscripts
is a mere fragment, written in Mediæval Latin, which tells of the
pilgrimage to Jerusalem of one Sæwulf, an Englishman, who must have
started from his native shores thirty-six years after the landing of
William the Conqueror, and less than two years after the coronation of
Baldwin.[8] The record of Sæwulf is the broken voice of an obscure,
unlettered palmer, which chance has preserved from common sepulture
with things more important in the Ancient Silences. It gives us little
more than a glimpse of a single year of adventurous pilgrimage in the
life of a plain Englishman who, like the Chinaman who undertook a
sacred journey nearly five centuries before him, having beheld “a gleam
upon the mountain, needs must arise and go thither.”

The narrative begins with the statement: “I Sæwulf, an unworthy
person and an evil doer, made for Jerusalem that I might pray at the
tomb of our Lord.” Who Sæwulf was, is open to conjecture. It seems
probable that he was the man of that name of whom William, Librarian
of Malmesbury Abbey, speaks in his “Book of Bishops”; a merchant who
had recurring spasms of penitence, during which he was wont to repair
to Wulstan, Bishop of Worcester, a prelate of “pious, simple truth,”
who commanded the affection of the people and the confidence of the
King. This Sæwulf was probably a native of Worcester. Wulstan, we know,
was the last of the Saxon Bishops; for the hand of the Norman was
heavy on the prostrate land, and it was the policy of the Conqueror,
as William of Malmesbury tells us, in another of his works, to replace
the native bishops on their death “by diligent men of any nation except
English”—a policy which the Church supported; for religion had been in
a decaying state in England for some years before the arrival of the
Normans. Indeed, “the clergy, contented with a very slight degree of
learning, could scarcely stammer out the words of the sacraments; and a
person who understood grammar was an object of wonder and astonishment.
The monks mocked the rule of their order by fine vestments and the
use of every kind of food.” Wulstan implored Sæwulf to give up a
livelihood which was beset with all manner of temptation, and to take
the habit; for his conviction of sin was soon over, and he invariably
resumed his former vices. Wulstan told him that the time would come
when he would become a monk, “which” says the Chronicler, “I afterwards
saw fulfilled; for he was converted in our monastery in his old age,
being driven to it by disease.” There is nothing in Sæwulf’s narrative
to indicate that he was in holy orders; more than once he speaks of
himself as one oppressed by a sense of sin; and the record of his
pilgrimage may very well have been translated into the dry, terse Latin
of the monks by another hand, or, conceivably, may have been written by
himself in his last years at Malmesbury.

Whoever he was, Sæwulf’s early manhood was spent in a disordered land
among a dejected people. During the reign of William Rufus, England
was visited by tempest and famine and even by severe earthquake;
rebellion was rife; the Welsh over-ran the county of Chester and part
of Shropshire, leaving them waste; Magnus, King of Norway, swooped down
the Irish Sea, occupied Anglesea, and threatened the mainland; the
common people were oppressed by their foreign masters and illegally
taxed; “the courtiers preyed upon the property of the country
people and consumed their substance,” says William of Malmesbury,
and Eadmer of Canterbury, our best authority on the period, confirms
his statement: “As to their cruelty towards their hosts,” he writes,
“or their unseemly conduct towards their wives and daughters, it is
shameful even to remember”; the royal progresses through England were a
travelling Sodom and Gomorrah. And we may judge of the tender mercies
of the time when we read that traitors to the King, or innocent men
deemed to be such, “were deprived of their sight and manhood.” These
inhumanities also disgraced the far more civilized Byzantine Empire.
No wonder that men’s hearts yearned for a “City of God,” or that their
hearts were set on the peace of the convent, or that they disdained the
mere perils of pilgrimage!

The existing fragment of Sæwulf’s narrative begins with his departure
from Southern Italy; but we know, from other sources, what were the
conditions and prescribed forms of pilgrimage, and how an English
pilgrim would reach Apulia.

First, he had to get the consent of near relatives, in order that the
interests of his family or dependents might be protected. To make sure
that the would-be pilgrim was moved by devotion or penitence, and
not by vain desire to see the world, he was also required to secure
the sanction of his bishop, who made investigation into his life
and character before granting it. The enquiry was a very searching
one in the case of a monk; for his real motive might be to escape
from conventual discipline. If satisfied, the Bishop or his delegate
solemnly presented him with a pilgrim’s staff and wallet, and bestowed
his benediction at Mass in the church of the parish in which the
pilgrim resided. He was furnished with a document which exhorted all
monasteries, priests, and faithful Christians to give him aid and
relief on his journey. He was now bound to set off without delay,
under penalty of being dealt with as a backslider and perjurer. When
the day of departure arrived, a procession of relatives, friends, and
pious people accompanied him some little distance, and then, having
been blessed by the clergy present, clad in white linen with the cross
marked on it, and duly sprinkled with holy water, he went on his way
alone.

The long and hazardous sea-voyage to the Mediterranean was shunned.
Despite the perturbed state of the Continent, it was safer to make
for the heel of Italy by the overland route. All men who bore arms
were under the obligation to defend him; no robber-baron might demand
a toll from him—nay the castle welcomed him, and he was seated at
table beside the house-priest. The bishop of every town and the abbot
or prior of every monastery gave him shelter and hospitality; alms
were specially devoted to the relief of the poor pilgrim and the
support of monasteries along the pilgrim’s path. If he were ill, the
doors of whatever hospital might be near were open to him, or he was
cordially received into the Infirmary of every convent. A pilgrim’s
hospice, founded in the first half of the ninth century by Louis the
Pious, stood amid the snowy wastes of Mont Cénis to shelter him from
its bitter blasts. He would pass through Italy, little affected by the
unceasing and bloody conflict of noble with bishop, bishop with city,
city with noble, and every one of a thousand petty communes and fiefs
with its neighbours; for the charitable monastery would prove a ready
asylum. Arrived at a convenient port, a greatly reduced passage-money
was required of a pilgrim to the Holy Land; and there were some ports
where ships belonging to them were compelled to carry pilgrims free of
all charge.

Mediterranean shipping was not notably different in build and badness
from that of Northern waters; but was often of larger size. Nearly all
that we know about it is derived from the uncouth paintings, coins,
and arms of maritime towns of a somewhat later period, which are
rather symbols than representations. The sailing-ship was shorter than
the galley, which was rowed as well as sailed; it was shaped somewhat
like a half-moon and was very broad in the beam. It could sail only
before the wind. There was rarely more than a single mast; the sails
were square; and the yards could be lowered to the deck like those
of a modern barge. These ships were not unlike the clumsy coasters
still to be met with off Norway. Passengers were very uncomfortably
crowded together, and must have had a terrible time. The outside
planks overlapped, and were held together by iron nails; and the seams
were stopped up with oakum. Mediæval vessels were crazy craft, and
frequently went to pieces when wind and wave ran high: he was a bold
traveller who tempted Neptune in those days, and especially bold if,
after a first experience, he braved the sea god a second time.

Brindisi was the usual place of embarquation; but for some reason,
which Sæwulf does not state, he started from Monopoli, a little port
midway between Bari and Brindisi. Now there was a general belief in
certain days being unlucky; a belief which persisted in spite of the
condemnation of the Church. A Christian Calendar of the early part
of the 4th century indicates what days are of ill omen, according to
the Astrology of Egypt. Popular belief credited the feast-day of St.
Mildred the Virgin (a saint of Kent) with this disqualification; and it
was on St. Mildred’s day, July 13th, 1102, that Sæwulf set sail in a
craft rather crazier than most. A storm came on the very same day the
port was left behind, and the ship was wrecked a short distance from
the harbour; but, “by Divine Mercy,” all aboard got safely to shore.
The passengers went on to Brindisi; their ship, having been patched
up in some fashion, sailed thither, and the pilgrims got on board
again; but alas! it was another of those unlucky Egyptian days! Corfu
was reached in two days (July 24th); but a great storm arose after
leaving port and drove the rickety craft before it. However, shelter
was gained at another of the Ionian islands—Cephalonia—on August
1st. Here, the company was still further depressed by the death of
one of their number. Cephalonia is opposite the Gulf of Lepanto, and,
sailing up the gulf, they landed at Patras, which Sæwulf speaks of as a
“notable _island_”; not improperly, the word island being often applied
to a port in those days. The ship stopped at Patras for a special
purpose—that its passengers and mariners should go on shore and pray
to St. Andrew the Apostle at the site of his martyrdom. Corinth was
reached on Aug. 9th, and Sæwulf and fellow pilgrims left their wretched
craft to avoid the long, stormy passage by Cape Matapan. He finds a
resemblance between his experiences and those of St. Paul: both had
suffered shipwreck, and Paul met with misadventure at Corinth, where
“we suffered many hardships.” When a pilgrim to the Holy Land speaks of
hardship, it was probably of an unusually severe kind. Roman Catholics
neither loved nor were loved by members of the Greek Communion; and the
behaviour of Crusading hosts in Eastern Europe was too recent to be
forgotten.

The pilgrims crossed the isthmus to Livadrostro, and, some riding
asses, the rest on foot, reached Thebes. They would find Thebes
inhabited chiefly by Jews, who were “the most skilled artificers in
silk and purple cloth of all Greece.” Sixty-four years later, a Spanish
Jew, Benjamin of Tudela on the Ebro, who visited the settlements of his
race in many lands and reported on their condition, found 300 Jews at
Corinth and no fewer than about 2,000 at Thebes, “many of them being
learned scholars, not to be equalled in the land of Greece, save in the
city of Constantinople.” Leaving Thebes the travellers arrived next day
at Negropont (Aug. 23rd). This land-journey had proved untoward; the
Greeks were so inhospitable and so suspicious of them that often they
had to pass the night in deserted huts and sheds. No wonder that they
do not go a little out of their way to visit Athens, in spite of the
fact that “in the Church of the Blessed Virgin there is a lamp which
is ever burning with miraculously replenished oil,” and that Scripture
records how St. Paul preached there and “certain men clave unto him and
believed.” Among these converts was Dionysius, the Areopagite. It may
be true that Dionysius “was born and got his learning there”: we are
indebted to Sæwulf for the information.

At Negropont, the band of pilgrims took passage in a tramp-trader,
which first touched at one of the islands of Petali, hard by Marathon;
but what Englishman of the year of grace 1102, even if he were an
educated monk, knew aught of the “glory which was Greece?” The voyagers
now made for Naxos, touching at various islands on their way; their
mediæval minds sightless to the classic lustre of the Cyclades. Sæwulf
does indeed speak of Naxos as being “near to Crete, that memorable
island”; memorable because his own lively experience of what it means
to “go down to the sea in ships” recalls the “tempestuous wind” which
caught St. Paul off Crete; for certain, he had never heard of that
Epimenides of whom the Apostle makes such vigorous use. Patmos is
reached, where the Beloved Apostle, banished by Domitian, “entered his
tomb alive.” Other islands are touched at, among them Cos, and here our
author exhibits his learning: it is the birthplace of Galen, “the most
famous physician among the Greeks.” However, Hippocrates and Galen were
both physicians, and that is near enough. On the trader goes, changing
its course, now north, now south; and the pilgrim associates every
place visited with some pious legend. Rhodes is reached, and history
is again rescued from oblivion: the Colossus was “an idol, 125 feet
high; the Persians destroyed it together with almost the whole Roman
province on their way to Spain.” Sæwulf, or tradition, has confused
the first conquering onrush of the Arabs with the Persian advance; but
the Colossus was destroyed, not by Persians but by earthquake, nine
centuries before Sæwulf’s time. Yet there is a basis for his story;
its fragments were removed for building purposes about the time of the
first Arab conquests. Sæwulf falls into a widespread blunder of his
unlettered age when he assumes that the inhabitants of Rhodes drew
their name from the Colossus, and that the Epistles to the Colossians
were directed to them.

Leaving Rhodes, a great storm drove the ship straight before it; but
the sailors got her into the harbour of Patara, “and, by next day,
the storm had abated, and we came to Long Island.” Here was a ruined
city which had been the refuge of exiles, escaped from the Turk. Myra,
on the mainland, was now reached; and Sæwulf states that it is “the
port of the Adriatic Sea; as Constantinople is of the Ægean”: either
his geography is not quite accurate, or he would imply that, in his
time, Myra received the main Eastern traffic from the Adriatic, and
Constantinople from the Ægean. At Myra, he worshipped at the empty tomb
of St. Nicholas. Favourable winds bore the ship thence to an island
called “Sixty oars,” on account of the force of the sea and the effort
required to overcome it. A discursion, out of sight of land, brought
the pilgrims to Paphos in Cyprus. We do not expect any reference to the
Cyprian Venus; but we are a trifle surprised to find that our author
now confuses two separate chapters of “Acts” in one jumbled statement.

Leaving Cyprus “we were tossed about by violent storms seven days’
space before we could reach our haven; and one night a fierce contrary
wind drove us back towards Cyprus; but Divine Mercy, Who is close at
hand to those who truly call on Him, vouchsafed no small pity for us
afflicted souls, and we resumed our proper course. Yet, during seven
nights, we were overwhelmed by such a tempest and were in such peril
that almost all hope left us. Nevertheless, at the rising of the
sun, behold! the coast of Joppa lay before our eyes; and even as the
turbulence of our peril had made our hearts to sink within us, so joy,
unexpected and unhoped for, lifted them up an hundredfold more. And so
it came to pass that, thirteen weeks after our departure from Monopoli,
the sea having been our home, or deserted hovels in the islands (the
Greeks not being hospitable), we made the harbour of Joppa, filled with
joy and thanksgiving.” Sæwulf gives no dates; but many have been fixed
by the industry of a French scholar, who compared feast days mentioned
in the narrative with the calendar, and its events with ascertained
dates. Sæwulf reached the Holy Land, Oct. 12th, 1102.

God had interposed on behalf of “the meanest of His servants and the
company of pilgrims”; and Sæwulf renders praise, with the manner of
the Psalms of David in his mind. But yet another danger from wind and
wave awaits him. He got warning from some weather-wise friends who knew
the badness of the harbour. But he shall tell his own tale: “The same
day that we anchored, someone, directed by God, as I believe, said to
me, ‘Master, go ashore this very day, for it may hap that to-night, at
dawn, a storm shall come on and stop you from landing.’ When I heard
this, the desire to land seized me. I got a boat and wrent ashore with
all my party. Even whilst I was landing the sea was vexed; the waves
became more troubled, and a tempest came on; yet by Divine Mercy, I
landed unharmed. What happened then? We entered the city to find a
lodging. Weary and overdone by our long labours, we fed ourselves and
went to rest. And then? In the morning, when we came out of church, we
heard the roaring of the sea and the populace shouting, and everybody
was running in a crowd to the shore, marvelling at such sounds as
they had never heard aforetime. And, when we got there, we beheld the
waves higher than hills, a countless number of bodies of men and women
lying in wretched-wise on the beach; and ships were crashed against
each other and broken into small bits. Could anyone hear a sound save
that of roaring breakers and splintering ships? For this drowned the
outcry of the crowd and the shouting in the ships. Our ship, however,
being a big one and strongly built, and some others, laden with corn
and other goods and with pilgrims going or returning, held to their
anchors still. Yet how were they tossed about? Into what terror were
they plunged! How their ladings were cast into the sea! What onlooker
so hard and strong as to keep a dry eye! Not long did we gaze when,
through the violence of the waves and currents, the anchors parted, the
ropes were broken asunder, and the ships abandoned to the fierceness
of the billows. All hope of safety was gone. Now they were cast high;
now flung down, and hurled by degrees upon beach or rock. There were
they dashed against one another in wretched plight, and, little by
little, torn to bits by the tempest. Neither would the savage blasts
allow of their getting back to the sea whole, nor the steepness of the
shore admit of their gaining safety there. But what gain in telling
how dismally sailors and pilgrims hung on; every hope gone, some to
ships, some to masts, some to spars, some to cross-tenders? What more
shall I tell? Some, overwhelmed with fright, are drowned. It may seem
unbelievable to many, yet I beheld with my own eyes the heads of some
separated from their bodies by the timbers of their own ship. Some,
washed from the decks, are borne away again into the deep. Some, who
can swim, leap into the sea. So, very many find their end. But just a
very few, relying on their strength, gain the land. Thus, of 30 ships
of largest size, of which some were Dromonds” (that is to say, having
two tiers of double oars), “Gulafri” (a sort of galley) “and Catts”
(vessels narrowing to the stern, with overhanging quarters and a deep
waist)—“all full of pilgrims and goods—of all these barely seven were
still unwrecked when I left the shore. That day more than a thousand
folk, of both sexes, perished. Never did eye behold greater horrors in
a single day. But the Lord, to whom be honour and glory, world without
end, delivered me from all this of His grace. Amen.”

The little company had escaped a great peril, but another lay ahead.
Two days later they set forth to Jerusalem, and found the way “hilly,
very rough, and very perilous. For the Saracens are constantly devising
traps for Christians; they lie hidden in the hollows of the hills
and in rocky holes, and by day and night remain ever sharply on the
look-out for those whom they may pounce upon, by reason of their being
few in numbers, or so jaded as to lag behind their band. Suddenly, the
Saracens are all round about; the next moment they are gone. Anyone
who does that journey, may make trial of this. How many human bodies,
torn by wild beasts, lie along the way and beside it! Perchance, some
one may marvel how the bodies of Christians should lie unburied. But
there is nothing to wonder at; for there is very little earth, and the
rocks are not easy to dig, and, even if there were soil, who would
be so unwise as to leave his band and dig his companion a grave all
by himself? He who should do so would dig his own grave rather than
one for his companion. On that wayside, not only the poor and weak,
but the rich and strong also, are in peril. If men are cut off by the
Saracens, yet more in number die from heat and thirst; many through
want of drink; more by drinking inordinately. Nonetheless we and all
our company came scatheless to the place we longed for.” Sæwulf’s
account of the dangers which beset the pilgrim is confirmed by that of
Daniel, Abbot of Kief, who made his pilgrimage four years later (1106,
A.D.) North of the pilgrim’s way lay Acre; south of it Ascalon, strong
fortresses, still held by the Saracen.

The track from Jaffa led to the gate of David, and, entering the
city, Sæwulf visited its holiest place first—the Martyrium or Holy
Sepulchre. The tomb was under cover, because the Church above was so
built as to be open to the skies. He tells us that Titus and Vespasian
destroyed the whole of Jerusalem to fulfil the prophesy of Christ, and
that the city has undergone the same fate seven times since Titus.
He has for guides native Syrians, a people whom he confuses with
the Assyrians and calls by that name. The guides told him that the
Church of the Holy Sepulchre was built in the time of Constantine the
Great. Now, the existing Church was only about 80 years old, and there
had been two previous buildings, of which the earlier was destroyed
by Chosroes II, early in the Seventh Century, and the second by
Mohammedans, early in the Eleventh Century.

He was then taken to see the place where Christ was imprisoned, the
spot where His Cross and the crosses of the two thieves were found,
the column to which Christ was bound (the thong with which He is said
to have been bound is still to be seen at Aix-la-Chapelle); all these
sacred objects of pilgrimage being near the Holy Sepulchre. He was
shown the “navel of the earth,” a spot which a contemporary of Sæwulf
tells us was in the outside wall of the Martyrium, beyond the altar.
Sæwulf assures us that Christ marked it out with His own hand, and
declared it to be the centre of the world. This tradition dates from
the Sixth Century. Readers of Dante will recall that the poet makes
Jerusalem and the Earthly Paradise the Antipodes of our globe; and,
indeed, the Holy City was at the middle of the circumscribed world
known to the Middle Ages. And had not David sung “God is my King of
old, working Salvation _in the midst of the earth_?”

Thence to Calvary; “Which is the very same place where Abraham built
an altar to sacrifice Isaac.” Traces of the Earthquake which rent the
rock, “for that it could not endure the death of its Maker without
breaking asunder,” were pointed out to him. The guides also took him to
Golgotha, the very place where a stream of the Saviour’s blood reached
the bones of Adam, “and he and the bodies of many saints arose.” Again
readers of Dante will think of the passage where the shade of Virgil
tells him how, some time after the Roman poet’s own death, Christ took
from Hades the souls of Adam and Moses and other Scriptural personages
of distinction, with many others “_e fecegli beati_,” “and made them
blessed.” Sæwulf has perfect trust in any information conveyed to him
by his “Assyrian” guides. Indeed, who so likely to know the truth about
this wonderful land as its natives?

Close by the Holy Sepulchre was a little monastery which merchants of
Amalfi had founded 54 years before Sæwulf saw it. It was the abode
of the Knights Hospitalers, who became so famous; but they had not
yet become that military order of which, after so singular a history,
England possesses traces in St. John’s Gate, Clerkenwell, and a
memorial in the beneficent work of which that building is the official
centre.

He saw the “Gate Beautiful,” through which Heraclius, triumphant bearer
of the Cross, entered after his defeat of the Persians; and heard how
“the stones fell down and closed the way, until an angel reproved
him; and he descended from his horse, and a passage was opened up to
him.” The guides took the pilgrim to see that stone which was the
pillow of Jacob when angels ascended and descended a celestial ladder
“and the Lord stood above it” at Bethel. It was now at Jerusalem,
and, traditionally, is the very stone which was transported to Scone,
whereon the Kings of Scotland sat to be crowned, and is to be seen at
the present day, placed below the Coronation Chair at Westminster Abbey.

He was taken to Bethlehem; and complains that there, as at every holy
place, the Saracen had destroyed everything. Yet the Convent of the
Virgin still stood, and within it he saw the very manger where the
infant Jesus lay; the very stone on which His head reposed in the
tomb, and which St. Jerome had brought hither from Jerusalem; the
marble table at which the Mother of our Lord sat at meat with the
Magi; a well which received their guiding star into its waters; and
the burial-place of the Innocents. The story of the Star falling into
a well is also told by that fraudulent Fleming who adopted the name of
Sir John Mandeville, in his “Voiage and travaile.”

As much of Palestine as had been conquered was still the scene of
unceasing disorder, brigandage, revolt and warfare; so pilgrims were
conducted to the holy places under military escort. Sæwulf went to
Hebron, and tells us of the tombs of the Patriarchs, ornamented by the
men of old and emitting sweet odours. The tombs were inside a strong
protecting fortress. Here, at Hebron, he found, still standing, an
ancient Ilex tree, under the shadow of which the Lord had appeared
to Abraham and promised that Sara should bear him a son. Apparently,
his friends, the “Assyrians,” during many centuries of experience,
had found what profit accrued to them in tacking on some Biblical
association to every available object.

Travelling Northward, he visited Nazareth and Cana of Galilee, whence
he beheld Mount Tabor, clad in refreshing green and sprinkled with
flowers. Still advancing to the North, he saw the glory of Lebanon
above him, and the springs which give birth to the milky waters of
Jordan.

More than seven months had passed since our simple-minded,
whole-hearted pilgrim landed at Joppa, and now he turns his steps
towards home. “Having seen every one of the Holy Places of Jerusalem
and its territory, so far as we were able; and our devotions done, we
took ship at Joppa on the day of Pentecost” (May 17th, 1903). Each
pilgrim would take on board with him a palm branch as ensign of his
success, and a few portable _souvenirs_.

Just as war with the Caliph of Cairo prevented our pilgrim from
reaching the Holy Land by way of Egypt (which was the ordinary route
from Western Lands), so its continuance compelled him to return
by an unusual journey. The ship turned from Joppa to the North.
Saracen ships were scouring the sea; and the returning pilgrims found
themselves hugging the shore, although they must pass by that one
fortified seaport which the Crusaders had not yet overcome. Four
days out from Joppa, and when a little to the south of Acre, “behold
twenty-six Saracen ships hove into sight. They were the squadron of
the Admiral of Tyre and Sidon, sailing for Babylonia with an army to
aid the Chaldeans in waging war with the King of Jerusalem” (_! sic_).
This statement is an example of how hearsay may germinate in the
uninstructed mind. It may not, however, be quite so wild as it seems.
Cairo is called Babylon in all Mediæval writings, but, as a matter of
fact, Arabs were, about this time, trying to turn Tancred out of his
fief at Edessa; and Edessa may, perhaps, be regarded as lying towards
the Babylon of Scripture. And a Saracen army was at sea, sent by the
Caliph of Cairo, the new “Babylon,” to raise the siege of Ascalon,
which Baldwin I. was conducting. Probably it was this expedition from
Cairo which Sæwulf came across. “Two vessels from Joppa, which were
with us, laden with pilgrims, left our ship to itself; for they were
lighter craft; and, by hard rowing, fled to Cæsarea. The Saracens
sailed all round our ship, and kept an arrow’s flight off, rejoicing
over so much plunder. However our men were ready to die for Christ;
they laid hold of their arms, and used up each moment in fortifying
the castle (at the stern) of our ship; for we had in our dromond 200
fighting men. After the space of about an hour, the chief of the
expedition, having held a council-of-war, ordered one of his sailors
to climb up to the mast-head, so as to find out what it was exactly
that we were at. And, when he learned from this man how strong was our
defence, he hoisted his high yards and made for the main. Thus did Our
Lord, of His Grace, rescue us from the foe that day. Afterwards our
folk from Joppa took three of these same ships and made themselves
rich men with the spoil thereof.”

Sæwulf’s dromond hugged the coast for eight days, and then crossed
the open sea to St. Andrews’, at the eastern extremity of Cyprus;
thence it made for Antiochetta on the mainland. “During this voyage
pirates often attacked us; but, under the protection of Divine Grace,
we suffered naught, whether from hostile attack or from tempestuous
tossing.” Rhodes was reached on June 23rd; and Sæwulf and some others,
who were weary of tacking east and west and of the slow progress made
by the heavy vessel, agreed to go a certain distance together, and
hired a smaller but swifter craft. Embarked in this, they returned
towards the Asian Coast. A contrary wind detained them a few days at
a place which Sæwulf calls Stromlo (Astypalæa), “once a fair city,
wholly made waste by the Turks.” At Scio, “we took leave of our (last)
ship and fellow-travellers, and began our journey to Constantinople,
in order that we might pray there.” While passing Tenedos, he heard
of the ruins of Troy, and “how many miles of ground they covered.” He
tells us of two fortresses facing one another from opposite sides of
the “Arm of St. George” (the Dardanelles), “which are so near as to
be only two or three bowshots apart, and which thus make the taking
of Constantinople an impossibility.” We have another reference to the
Trojan war: “The Greeks say that Helen was carried off (from Eregli) by
Paris Alexander.” And now the fragment ends, leaving our pilgrim landed
at Rodosto on the Sea of Marmora, Sept. 10th, 1103. It has taken him
more than four months’ voyage from Joppa to reach within fifty miles of
New Rome. Doubtless he found at St. Sophia, as Benjamin of Tudela did
towards the end of the same century, “a quantity of wealth beyond all
telling ... and the like of these riches is not to be seen in any other
Church in the world.”

A long, weary journey, full of the excitement of peril, still lay
before him, whatever route he might take. All we know is that, arrived
at his native town (Worcester?), a procession would receive and
accompany him to his parish church. There he would render thanks to God
for his safe return, and deliver his palm branch into the hands of the
priest, who would lay it on the altar.

Some chance has rescued this broken record of an obscure, unlettered
palmer from oblivion. He is as the hollow voice of a shade which has
burst its sepulture in the silences of oblivion. We catch but a glimpse
of some tenuous wraith; once warm and breathing flesh. It tells us
of a few months in the brief adventure of Life. Yet we recognize, as
in Hiuen-Tsiang, one who, having beheld “a gleam on the mountain,”
must “arise and go seek it.” Sæwulf the Englishman may be but “a poor
thing,” yet he is our own. There lies the excuse for “a poor humour of
mine, sir, to take that that no man else will.”




MOHAMMED IBN ABD ALLAH

BETTER KNOWN AS IBN BATÛTA, THE GREATEST OF MOSLEM TRAVELLERS, A.D.
1304–77.




CHAPTER I.

THE WHIRLWIND FROM ARABIA AND WHAT FOLLOWED.


Marauder as he was, the Arab, like his half-brother the Hebrew, carried
an ethical spark in his bosom which could be readily fanned into a
consuming blaze. He was accustomed, in the silence of the stony waste
and of the stars, to plunge into the depths of his own spiritual being,
or to await, in patience, some portent from the unseen. Mohammed, a
mystic, like unto the ancient prophets of Israel, hating false gods and
illuminated by the “One All Merciful, Lord of Creation and Sultan of
Life,” in trance, in ecstasy, and in paroxysms of enthusiasm, strove
to purge his fellow countrymen of their vain worship of idols and
false gods, and to lead them to the feet of the Almighty. At first he
preached to closed ears; but persistence and enthusiasm prevailed: the
religious intoxication of the Prophet was shared by the unconquered
sons of the desert; the Arab took fire from the flaming words which
fell from these inspired lips, and was eager to carry the message to
the uttermost ends of the earth or to perish in the effort. Within ten
years of Mohammed’s flight from Mecca (A.D. 622) all Arabia was won to
the Monotheist by conviction or by conquest.

The combination of spiritual fervour with a prospect of worldly
achievement is formidable. A year after the death of the Prophet,
Kalid, riding against the embattled hosts of Persia (A.D. 633),
broke into a chant which reveals a baser spring of action in the
Arabian mind. “Behold the wealth of the land,” he sang; “its paths
sweat fatness; food abounds as do stones in Arabia. It were a great
thing to fight here for worldly goods; but to battle in a holy war
is beyond praise. These fruitful fields and Paradise!!!” It was not
religious fanaticism alone, although it was religious fanaticism in the
main, which put an invincible scimitar into the hands of the tough,
tenacious, untamed Arab. He was impelled by religious fervour, without
doubt; but religious fervour had the strong support of a lusting after
possessions, all the more tempting in contrast with the stinted boons
of his desert home. And, should he fall in battle, was he not promised
an immediate admission into Paradise with those sensuous enjoyments,
which were most in contrast with the penury of the nomad tent, and
which were most alluring to the imagination of the average sensual man?

When material greed supports spiritual fanaticism, there is no need
to wonder at success. The Arab advanced against exhausted, loosely
organised Empires, sprawling and decayed; he offered righteous
government, a pure simple faith, with tolerance of the unbeliever under
penalty of a light tribute. The requital of refusal was the sword.
Damascus fell three years after Mohammed’s death (A.D. 635); Jerusalem,
within two year; Egypt, six years later (A.D. 641), and Persia when the
Prophet had only lain a decade in his tomb (A.D. 642). Not many years
passed before Okba swept across North Africa, rode his steed far into
the Atlantic tide, and waved his scimitar over the waste of waters,
lamenting that it put a limit to victory. Thrice was the Mediterranean
coast of Africa conquered, and thrice was the Arab well-nigh expelled;
and then Greek and Roman and all civilized inhabitants of the coast,
preferring the rule of the Moslem to that of the barbarous Berbers
who had replaced him, welcomed the fourth invasion, and settled down
under Arab rule. By the close of the century which in its youth saw
the hurried night-flight of Mohammed from Mecca, the Moslem held sway
from the Oxus to the Western ports of Barbary. At the beginning of the
next century the great Iberian peninsula was added to the dominion
of the Caliph; and, although Ironic Destiny turned back the triumph
of the Prophet in the decisive battle of Tours (A.D. 732), a hundred
years after his death, the great Iberian Peninsula was held by the Arab
from sea to sea and as far north as the Cantabrian Mountains and the
southern spurs of the Pyrenees; while the Koran was preached, although
it did not everywhere prevail, east and west, over a broad belt more
than seven thousand miles in length. The muezzin called the Faithful to
prayers from the Atlantic to the Yellow Sea.

When a race, endowed with natural gifts, subdues an enlightened people,
it becomes inseminated by the higher culture it encounters, and is
stimulated to evolve an art, a literature, and a polished civilization
of its own. So was it when Rome conquered Hellas; so was it when the
Northmen established themselves in France and Sicily; so was it when
the thundering steeds of the desert bore their wild riders north and
east and west, and the ancient Parthian monarchy and the fairest, the
wealthiest, and the most cultured of the Roman provinces fell before
the triumphant Arab. Like the Norman, like the Roman, he had the
natural gift of governing as well as a passionate wisdom. He steeped
himself in the lore of Hellas; it was through him that the philosophy
of Aristotle was transmitted to the Schoolmen; it was through him that
St. Thomas Aquinas was able to construct that venerable philosophical
system, based on the Peripatetic, which has received the sanction and
endorsement of the Church of Rome; it was through him, therefore,
that Dante beheld that “glorious philosopher,” that “guide of human
reason,” that “_Maestro di color che sanno_,” “Master of those who
know,” seated amid a philosophic family. The great names of Averrhoes,
Avicenna, Avempace, Algazel, and Avicebron attest the freedom of
Arab speculation in the tenth, eleventh and twelfth centuries.
Mohammedans were the begetters of chemical science; they eagerly
pursued the study of botany; they contributed much to geography; they
carried medicine far beyond the ancient limits of Galen and Celsus;
they became bold, brilliant and successful operators, and introduced
new methods into surgery; they cultivated letters and left a noble
literature behind them; they were poets almost to a man: Princes wrote
verses to the stars in some interval between private plot and public
slaughter; water-carriers and camel-drivers vied with professional
poets in singing the praises of love in those delicious hours when
the refreshing breezes of the night might carry songs beyond the
lattice of the harem to be received with the light laughter of girls;
even the forbidden wine-flask became a theme for song. Much of Arabic
love poetry is immortal, and few are the literatures in which it is
surpassed. In Architecture and the Decorative Arts, the Arabs achieved
inimitable elegance and grace; as workers in metal they were supreme.
After a prolonged struggle, they subdued and civilized the wild Berber.
They regarded the Jew as a brother, less well informed in sacred things
than themselves; and they treated even the “tritheistic” Christian with
forbearance. Indeed they were not too anxious to proselytize; for the
unconverted were taxable, and they did not wish the sources of public
income to dry up. But taxation was light, and, in the main, the Arab
yoke was far from heavy. Slaves were treated with humanity, and might
earn their freedom at any moment by a simple profession of faith: the
Negro, the Spaniard, the Berber, the Turk, could acquire the full right
of a man by the repetition of a short formula. During the declining
years of the Byzantine Empire, and until Liberty and Literature arose
in the Italian Communes, the Mohammedan bore the torch of learning and
kept human justice enthroned.

But Islam was another illustration of the profound truth already
recorded in this volume as one of the melancholy tenets of Buddhism:
Every human institution bears within it the seeds of its decay. Though
a sense of righteous dealing dwelt from of old in the bosom of the
Arab, in his native desert the sword which executed it was held by
his own right hand. The predatory tentsmen were divided into clans;
and between the clans there were blood-feuds. They were a democratic
people; but they had a deep reverence for men of noble blood; and their
feuds were taken up by the chief men of the cities of Arabia, and by
those leaders who, later, became the governors of new provinces. And
the conquered Berbers had precisely the same characteristics: they
also were predatory, democratic, and revered their noble families.
Moreover, both races were readily moved to the more violent of the
emotions of religion. Before long Moslem fought against Moslem, and
a thousand forms of religious dissent weakened, although they did
not destroy, the essential unity of Faith. Again, the extensive and
rapidly acquired Empire was too vast and too ill-organized to be ruled
by one, all-powerful Caliph. The centre of government was transferred,
during the revolutions of Islam at variance with itself, from Damascus
to Bagdad and from Bagdad to Cairo; but the Caliph of Cairo was
defended by, and therefore in the hands of Mamelukes—slaves, bought
in childhood and trained to arms. The Mameluke became the ruler;
and, by the middle of the Thirteenth Century, the Caliph was a mere
nominal Spiritual Head, far feebler than the Pope in Rome. For, distant
provinces were continually falling away from central authority; and it
was never long before the ally who came forward to support the Caliph
found it to his advantage to turn against him. The Mohammedan world was
divided, not merely between the Shiite and Sunnite sects, but between
many ambitious and rival States. Long before the Fourteenth Century,
Islam was past its prime. There was decay in matters political, in
literature, and in art. Yet the amity in Islam was greater than its
discord. The need of mutual protection against the Christian, and
the duty of every Mohammedan to make a pilgrimage to Mecca at least
once in his lifetime, helped to preserve true brotherly feeling among
all followers of the Prophet, whatever their rank, their wealth, or
the colour of their skin. The study of the Koran implied a study of
Arabic: there was therefore a common language to serve the needs of
intercommunication. The Koran was carried into mysterious lands, known
before its arrival only in the distortion of legend and in fables
of romance. Passionate devotion to a Faith which antagonistic or
far-separated races came to hold in common swept away these obstacles
to commutual intimacy. Huge hosts of Pilgrims from many lands met at
Mecca, and different caravans and different sects united in prayer and
praise. Some had encountered peril by sea; all had baffled the craft
or repelled the attack of robber-bands; all had endured trials of the
desert; all had triumphed over those countless dangers which lurked
along difficult ways. Thus, disciplined in endurance and accustomed to
adventure, latent powers of mind and character were aroused. Strange
sights awakened the curiosity of the trader; novel wares excited his
cupidity and converted him into an explorer of the world. In spite
of the intertwining of religious zeal with commercial instinct,
Pagan princes saw their opportunity of enrichment, and welcomed the
Arab, Moorish, or Persian merchant. And, in days of peace, the whole
Mohammedan world was open to every Mohammedan traveller; rulers
received him with elaborate courtesy and sped him on his way, rejoicing
in gifts. It mattered not whether he entered the gateway of some
princely residence, or stood on the threshold of some peasant’s hut; he
was sure at least of welcome and refreshment. The trader might settle
anywhere and find amity awaiting him; an honest man was an honoured
guest in whatever land he might pursue his calling. A Christian,
Missionary to the East, who died in Ibn Batûta’s time, bears witness
to the brotherly love which obtained among Moslems of different races.
So we shall not marvel overmuch at Ibn Batûta accomplishing what even
to-day would be considered world-wide travel, or at his discovering
children of the same father, who in their childhood watched the sun
setting over Atlantic waters, prosperously dwelling in their maturity,
one, where the dawn breaks from the Yellow Sea; one, where the oasis
lies an incongruous and solitary blossom amid the sands of Sahara.




CHAPTER II. A RESOLUTE PILGRIM


Among Mohammedan pilgrims and travellers Ibn Batûta stands without
a peer. He was born in a city which was once an extreme outpost of
Roman rule in Africa, the Ancient Tingis, the modern Tangiers, in the
Sultanate of Fez, 24th February, 1304. He devoted his youth to the
study of the Koran and its exegesis; becoming thereby an expert in
theology and jurisprudence. For, throughout the Mohammedan world the
Koran is the living fountain of all law and of all piety: hence Moslem
theology and law are inextricably intertwined.

“Life is a pure flame, and we live by an invisible sun within us,”
is one of the quaint metaphors of Sir Thomas Browne. The old Norwich
physician is writing of the body; but his remark is profoundly true of
the soul of men. By the time that Batûta had reached the age of 21, he
tells us that he was all aflame with “inner desire and determination
to visit the Holy Places; tearing himself away from those who were
dear to him, both male and female, and taking wing from home as a
bird doth from its nest.” He started from his native city when not
quite twenty-one years and four months old (14th June, 1325), making,
first, for Tlemçen, the capital of a Moslem State 300 miles distant
from Tangier. Tlemçen remains in the present writer’s memory as a gem
set among the Algerian Mountains, remarkable for the ruins of Mansûra,
which almost run up to its walls—a rival city built by a rival prince
during a siege which dragged on longer than the ten years’ assault
on Troy—remarkable also for a master-piece of decoration in that
Thirteenth Century which was the great period of Moslem Architecture
no less than of our own. In this beautiful city rested a Tunisian
Embassy which had completed its mission and was about to return;
and this he joined. When he arrived at Bougie, he became a prey to
fever; but the patient was a man of mettle and he pushed on. Fever was
not the only foe. All North Africa was more or less unsafe, by reason
of Nomadic Berbers and brigands; and hostilities were frequent between
the States into which the great Empire of the Undivided Caliphate had
broken up. The returning Embassy was exposed to danger on its journey
“from the perfidy of Arabs.”

Arrived at Constantine, he received the first of those welcome
donatives which it was incumbent on the Rulers of Islam to bestow. It
was a scarf for head-gear; and tucked in its folds, with considerate
delicacy, were two gold coins.

At Bona, the ancient Hippo, whereof once Augustine was bishop, fever
again preyed on him, and he became so ill that he could only keep his
saddle by taking his turban off and tying himself on with it; nor
could he stand at all during the whole long journey to Tunis. When the
Embassy arrived at its destination, the inhabitants came outside the
walls to welcome the cavalcade. Weak, weary, and worn down by illness,
unfriended and solitary, among strangers who were joyfully greeted
by relatives and friends and fellow-countrymen; remote from all that
was hallowed by family affection or endeared by early association, a
terrible tempest of longing swept the bosom of our pilgrim. He saw all
the others saluted: “there was no salutation for me” he says, “I knew
no soul there. I burst into a flood of tears. A pilgrim saw this; he
came forward and did me courtesy; nor did he cease to take me off my
thoughts by his conversation until I was housed in the city.” This is
the sole occasion on which we hear a word of home-sickness during a
journey which lasted more than a score of years. The born traveller,
like the born sailor, may feel the pang and have it renewed, but he
brushes it aside. Moreover, we shall shortly find Ibn Batûta setting up
a travelling-home of his own.

The Caravan for Mecca was about to start from Tunis; and we find
our jurisconsult become its Cadi, or justiciary. A hundred bowmen
accompanied it through a district always perilous by reason of
marauding nomads, who lurk among its hills. It was the rainy season;
the weather turned so wet and cold that the caravan halted at Sfax,
and remained there some time, hoping for improvement. Ibn Batûta
seized the opportunity to marry the first wife of whom we are told.
She was a daughter of a syndic of Tunis; and probably this was his
first, but far from being his last, entrance into matrimony. For he
was a man of taste, and we shall find him, in the course of time,
become an experienced Benedict, and by no means indifferent to the
charms of his pretty slave-concubines. All delay was intolerable
to Batûta; so, accompanied by his bride, he set off at the head of
an armed band, bearing its standard. He soon entered a district
notorious for brigandage even to-day, when conquering France and Italy
hold the land and bestow sanguinary lessons on wild tribesmen and
robbers-in-blood. Fierce nomads hovered around the little company,
awaiting an opportunity to attack; but happily the caravan caught it
up at one of those tombs of saint or warrior which the Moslem holds in
such veneration. Probably Batûta’s father-in-law was in the caravan;
for we are now told of dissensions between the two men, although
there is silence as to the subject of dispute. If the Prophet granted
the doubtful privilege of a plurality of wives, he mitigated the
inconveniences of polygamy by extreme facility in divorce. Batûta
availed himself of this, and sent his bride back to her father. The
ill-luck, which so soon attended this first matrimonial venture, did
not deter him from a second experiment: he lost no time in marrying
a fellow-countrywoman, presumably also a fellow-pilgrim; she was
the daughter of a dignitary of Fez. The pilgrims halted a whole day
to indulge in wedding festivity. On the 3rd April, 1326, nearly ten
months after Batûta’s departure from Tangier, the caravan drew up at
Alexandria, and his long and not too safe journey along the southern
coast of the “mid sea, moaning with memories,” was at an end.

Alexandria was, at that time, one of the great commercial centres of
the world. Shipping from all Christendom and North Africa were to be
found in its haven. Batûta tells us that it surpassed all ports he
ever saw, excepting Colon and Calicut in India, the Italian settlement
in the Crimea, and Zaitun (Thsiuan-Cheu) at that time the great
port of China. Alexandria was almost as remarkable for Moslem piety
as for trade. Batûta made a point of visiting a learned and pious
person there, who, like all Mohammedan saints, was reputed to possess
miraculous powers. The saint’s acuteness penetrated into the character
of his visitor: he perceived a born-wayfarer in the prescriptive
pilgrim, and told him that he had a taste for travel. “‘Yes,’ was my
reply,” says Batûta, “although at that time, I had formed no project of
distant travel. ... ‘You will see my brother in Sind, another brother
who is in India, and yet a third who is in China, and will bear my
salutations to them.’ I was astounded at what he said, and made up my
mind to visit these countries; nor did I give up my resolve until I had
beheld all three men.” “Only strongly impassioned men may achieve great
results,” says Mirabeau. We shall see what Batûta’s passion was and
what he accomplished.

His keen eye noted the glories of Alexandria; the great lighthouse
of Ptolemy, in the last stage of decay, and that great column of
Diocletian, mis-called Pompey’s Pillar. Stung more than ever by a
divine gadfly, he must run all over Lower Egypt, visiting every living
saint of renown and every relic of the past, especially such relics as
were the tombs or dwellings of departed saints. The attention which
holy men paid to their dreams and the confidence with which they
interpreted them recall the Hebrew Scriptures. Batûta tells us that
he visited an unusually gifted and eminently holy seer; and from
that time “good fortune attended me throughout my travels.” But our
traveller was no mere inattentive dreamer: the minuteness and accuracy
of his observations are remarkable; and his statements are fully
confirmed in the literature of contemporary and later travel, and other
records of the age in which he lived.

Among the places he visited, we find him at Damietta, where was
preserved the cell of the Chief of the Calenders. The very name
Calender recalls one’s youth and those fantastic fables of the “Arabian
Nights” which delighted it. A Calender was a Moslem under vow to
deliver himself from the allurements of earth and to consecrate his
life to things spiritual. It was the usage of all Calenders to shave
off beard and eyebrow; and Batûta supplies us with a story to account
for their disfigurement. The founder of the sect was a personable man,
and a certain lady fell in love with him and pursued him in every
conceivable way. But all her lures and devices coming to nought, she
contrived a still more ingenious stratagem. She got an old woman,
who, of course, could not read, to stop the beloved one, who was as
good-natured as he was devout, when on his way to the mosque, and ask
him to read a letter which she said she had received from her son. He
complied, and then quoth the old woman: “My son has a wife who dwells
in yonder house. Will you be so good as to read it in the passage so
that she may hear what her husband says?” He agreed to this also; but
no sooner had he crossed the threshold than the old woman clapped the
door to, and the love-sick lady appeared, attended by her slaves, who
forced him into an inner room. She cast herself at him, and began to
take liberties with him. So he made the excuse that it was necessary
for him to retire privately. No sooner was he alone, than he whipped
out a razor which he had with him, and divested himself of beard and
eyebrow. Then he presented himself before the enamoured woman, who
was so disgusted at the disfigurement that she had him chased from
the house. “Thus,” says Batûta, “by Divine Providence, his chastity
was preserved, and his sect shaved eyebrow and beard from that time
forward.”

This is one of the many anecdotes which Batûta thrusts into his
narrative. It is much more amusing than most of them. All Orientals
(and Moors are essentially Orientals) dote on pointless fable and
wild romance. They are insatiate for marvel, and gulp down any
stretch of fancy coloured by religion. Batûta’s farrago of stories
is, for the most part, silly. Happily, these legends are short. He
wrought diligently in hagiology; he was a-gape for yarns, remembered
them all and carefully recorded them; for they suited his own taste
and that of his nation and time. They are the gatherings of a man
profoundly learned in the Koran and Mohammedan lore; one concerned,
like the Pharisees of old, with minor questions of the Law and minutiæ
of ceremonial observance; vexed, as it were, about tithes of small
herbs. His main interest was his religion, and in his religion he was
a meticulous pedant. He had a natural love of the miraculous, and
religious credulity case-hardened it. Every mosque was a magnet to
draw him from afar; he made a pilgrimage to every Mohammedan shrine
he heard of; he cannot away without its legend. He reports wonders as
dull as they are extravagant. They possess neither genius nor charm
nor authority. Sometimes Oriental taste for the tawdry is to blame:
sometimes he is flatly gulled. But, in mundane matters, restless
impulses converted the credulous pundit into a man of the world. He
records accurately what he actually saw and heard, or what he believed
he saw and heard. He was interested in all that life had to offer; but
supremely so in all that had to do with Islam.

From the mouths of the Nile, Ibn Batûta approached that ancient land
where mournful memorials stand out, clear and awful, in the flood of
light; where every winding of the mysterious valley repeats the enigma
of the tomb. He came to Cairo, and saw the Pyramids,

  “Memphis, and Thebes, and whatso’er of strange
   Dark Ethiopia on her desert hills conceals.”

He tells us of all in architecture that struck him as worthy of
mention, of the products of the soil, of the habits of the people,
and of their government. He praises the emulation of the provincial
Emirs of Egypt in good works and the building of mosques. He watches
the gathering of great personages at the procession of the Mahmil, or
drapery woven to cover that sanctuary at Mecca wherein lay the object
of Arabian worship ages before Mohammed was born. For the Sacred Stone
fell from Paradise with Adam; and the Archangel Gabriel carried it to
him for the house which he built to God.

Magistrates and juris consults, the great officials of the Sultan and
the Syndics of Corporations, some on horseback, some on foot, assemble
at Cairo and await the Holy Drapery. The Emir who, this year, is to
head the annual pilgrimage, arrives with attendant troops and camels
and water-carriers. A conical box encloses the sacred cloth. All the
nondescript population of the city follow it. By some trick of the
camel-drivers, their beasts are urged to strange screeching; and the
motley throng makes its slow progress round the city, a winding river
of vivid colour and odd effect; a procession not without dignity, but
which an ancient Athenian had perhaps found a tawdry show compared with
the simple grace of the procession of the _peplops_ in his City of the
Violet Crown.

From Cairo, our pilgrim makes his way to Panopolis, then “a great town,
fine and well-built,” and so to Syene, partly following the river where
each new morning mocks the ruined temples, and partly taking short cuts
across the desert.

A holy man told him that he would find it impossible to fulfil his
pilgrimage just then; but he pushed across the unpeopled sands which
lie between the Nile and the Red Sea, and, after a trying journey
of fifteen days, found himself among a “black” race, called Bodjas,
who were settled at Aidhab, at that time a port of considerable
trade. These people wore yellow garments and affected the smallest of
head-gear. They would seem to have preserved their independence by
martial spirit; and, as is so often the case among a warrior-people,
daughters were not allowed to succeed to property. At this moment, they
were at war with the Mamaluke soldiery of Egypt; and it was impossible
for pilgrims to get transport across the Red Sea.




CHAPTER III

A ROUNDABOUT PILGRIMAGE


Now, besides the shrewd reading of Batûta’s character by the holy
man of Alexandria, who saw in him the born traveller, another Sheik
had also read his man aright and foretold that he should meet the
seer’s brothers in widely separated parts of the world. Oracles are
often suggestive and start the way to their own fulfilment. These
predictions actually came about. Batûta assures us that he had at the
time no intention of running over nearly all of the known earth; but by
now an inborn tendency to keep moving had developed into a veritable
_wanderlust_. “A brief space,” sings Pindar, “a brief space hath
opportunity for men; but of him it is known surely when it cometh, and
he waiteth thereon.” Batûta’s opportunity had come to him. Stopped from
reaching Mecca during the present pilgrimage, he resolved to retrace
his steps to Cairo, push on to Palestine, visit its sacred spots and
the renowned cities of Syria, join the Syrian Caravan, and take the
long, fearsome journey from Damascus over the Arabian waste. Here was
occasion to visit holy places only less interesting to the Moslem
than to the Christian, to wander at leisure in notable lands, and to
compare the amazing ways of the tribes of men. He sold all that might
encumber him, and returned to High Egypt. The Nile was in flood; he
sailed down it, spent a night at Cairo, and pushed on, (A.D. 1326).
There was a caravan-route to Palestine, north of Sinai, with stations
in the desert. Each station had its _Khân_, or inn, an institution
which afforded bed and stabling, but not food or fodder. But there
was a shop at each station, where all that might be wanted was sold;
and there was a water-cistern, free to all comers at the door of each
inn. At the frontier of Palestine, there was a custom-house, and a
passport must be produced before one was allowed to cross the boundary
in either direction. At Khalil, a town of Hebron, remarkable for its
beauty, and also for the unusual distinction of being well lit at
night, Batûta admired a mosque said to have been reared by those genii
whom the wisdom of Solomon had made his servants, and whom he evoked
by his mystic talisman. Passing through Palestine, our pilgrim visited
those very few places the sanctity of which could be established by
indisputable record and those very many places which owed their fame
to rank imagination or crafty legend begotten of sordid avarice. He
went to the birthplace of Jesus, because the Moslem regards Jesus as
a fore-runner of Mohammed: and from Bethlehem he came to Jerusalem.
He thought the Mosque there as fine a building as any on earth. It
occupied one side of a vast courtyard, and its fretted walls and roof
shone with gilding and vivid colours. In the middle of the Mosque was a
rock, so brilliant in hue that no idea of its glory could be given. And
this was the rock whence (so says tradition) Mohammed rode up to heaven
on the sacred winged ass.

Tyre, “mother of cities fraught with pride,” Acre and Askalon
were in ruins—the result of the Crusades. Tiberias rejoiced in a
bathing-establishment. Having plenty of time to fill up before the
Syrian caravan should leave Damascus, the pilgrim wandered hither and
thither, backwards and forwards, and saw many famous cities, such as
Beyrout, Tripoli, Aleppo, Baalbec, Emessa and Antioch. He found all
the people who inhabited the district of Gabala sadly misguided; for
they believed Ali, son-in-law of the Prophet to be a god. They neither
purified themselves, nor prayed, nor fasted. They had turned mosques
into cattle-sheds; and, should any pious wanderer wish to pray in one
of the desecrated buildings, these heretics were wont to gibe at him
and shout: “Don’t pray, ass that thou art; fodder shall be given thee.”

Nomads from Central Asia had penetrated Asia Minor and reached the
Mediterranean shore. Here and there they had settled; just as Scythian
and Hun, Goth and Vandal once forced their way into the Roman Empire
and effected lodgement within it before they rose and overthrew it. But
the Emirs, whatever their nationality, would seem to have maintained
decent government. Sometimes the despotisms of Islam surprise us by
such unexpected qualities as sagacity, prudence, and self-restraint.
At Latakia, Batûta found that, when anyone was condemned to die, the
official appointed to superintend the execution was expected to go up
to wherever the condemned man might be, return without apprehending
him, and ask the Emir to repeat the sentence. Not until three such
journeys had been made and the sentence thrice delivered was it carried
out. On the other hand, secret murder was a favourite political engine.
Our pilgrim beheld, on the heights of Lebanon, strongholds of that
military sect, the Hashashin, to which we owe the word assassin. “They
will admit no stranger among them, unless he be of their own body. The
Sultan, El Malik El Nasir, uses them as his arrows; and, through them,
he strikes down those of his foes that dwell afar from him; such, for
instance, as may dwell in Persia or anywhere else. Various duties are
allotted to different men among them; and when the Sultan wishes one of
them to waylay some foe, he bargains as to the price of blood. Should
the murderer accomplish his work, and return to safety, his reward is
paid to him; and should he fail, his heirs receive it. These folk carry
poisoned knives wherewithal to strike their prey.”

Laodicea would seem to have been held by a ruler who, like the
robber-barons of Germany or the pirates of Dalmatia, was a terror to
the trader: “he is said to take by violence all the ships he can.” Like
all travellers, Batûta is enthusiastic about the glories of Lebanon.
He found it “the most fertile mountain on Earth, where are copious
springs of water and shady groves; and it is laden with many kinds of
fruit. And I beheld there very many of that host of hermits who have
left the world that they may devote themselves to God.”

Two thousand feet above the sea-level lay Damascus, most ancient of
cities, with a delightful climate and a productive soil. “The chief
Mosque is the most splendid in the world, most tastefully built,
excelling in beauty and grace.” His interest in mosques and public
worship is inextinguishable; and he recounts the dramatic methods of a
certain preacher. There dwelt at Damascus an imam whose orthodoxy was
not above suspicion; indeed he had already suffered imprisonment on
that score. It so fell out that, one Friday, I was at his preaching.
He came down the stairway of the pulpit calling out: ‘God came down
to the Earthly Paradise in the very same way as I am coming down.’ A
theologian who was there denied this; and the congregation, set on the
preacher and beat him. A complaint was made against this too literal
expositor; he was cast into prison, and there he died.

Islam has always been remarkable for charity. Damascus boasted many
benevolent institutions. “As I was passing along a street one day,”
says Batûta “I saw a slave-child who had dropped a porcelain dish, made
in China, which lay in pieces on the ground. A crowd gathered round the
little Mameluke, and one of them said, ‘Pick up the pieces and carry
them to the overseer of the Utensils Charity.’ This man took the little
slave with him to the overseer, who at once gave him what money was
necessary to buy such another dish. This is one of the best of these
endowments; for the owner of the slave would doubtless have beaten him
or scolded him severely. Moreover he would have been heart-broken. So
the endowment really relieves sorrowful bosoms.” Batûta gives more
than one little indication that children (and even his own wives
occasionally) could touch his heart. The Moslem can be very pitiful;
he usually treats his slaves kindly; and one does not wonder that our
pilgrim speaks warmly about the piety and high civilization of Damascus
in his time. He was licensed to teach in that beautiful city; but found
time to visit the cavern which is one of the places where Abraham is
said to have been born, and the grotto where Abel’s blood was still to
be seen; “for his brother dragged him thither.”

Batûta started with the Pilgrim’s Caravan to the Holy Cities on
September 1st, 1326. Many hundreds of perilous miles lay before him.
The mere solitude of the desert always inspires insupportable dread,
and to secure a sufficient supply of water is a problem not always to
be solved. Batûta was told how, during one pilgrimage, water gave out,
and “a skin of it rose to a thousand _dinars_; yet both seller and
buyer perished.” Ancient travellers always speak with awe of the weird
noises which suddenly break the silence of the desert and inspire a
new dread. Shifting sands cause these sounds. Batûta tells us of one
huge sandhill called The Mount of Drums, because the Bedouins “say that
a sound as of drums is heard there every Thursday night.” But this
particular pilgrimage, although made along a difficult and dangerous
route, was comparatively uneventful, as were all the journeys Batûta
made to Mecca. He gives small space to it, and we shall find the record
of a much livelier and more interesting pilgrimage from Damascus in
the pages of Varthema. The journey was often one of perils, grave and
manifold.




CHAPTER IV

GLIMPSES OF ARABIA, PERSIA AND EAST AFRICA IN THE FOURTEENTH CENTURY


After duly visiting the tomb of the Prophet at Medina and performing
the prescribed rites at Mecca, Batûta, still insatiate of travel,
joined the Persian caravan on its homeward journey, and soon came to
the place where, to this day, the devil is lapidated. “It is a great
collection of stones. Everyone who comes to it hurls one. They say
there was once a heretic who was stoned to death there.” From Medina,
Central Arabia was crossed, and a journey of 600 miles brought the
caravan to a town in the Nedjd which was one of the claimants to the
possession of the bones of Ali, the son-in-law of the Prophet. Where
Ali really was buried is unknown. But the excited mind worked a great
effect on the body here, for, on a certain night of the year devoted
to religious revival, “cripples were brought to the tomb, even from
far-away lands, and were laid on it soon after sunset. Then there was
praying and reciting of the Koran and prostrations; and, about midnight
the halt rose up, sound and hale.”

At Bussora, the port so opulent and its trades so flourishing in the
days of Haroun-al-Raschid, one dared not venture to travel abroad
without the protection of a Bedouin escort: “There is no journeying
possible in these parts except with them.” Yet traces remained of the
former wealth of the city. “Bussora is richer in palm-trees than any
place in the world. Its people are generous and friendly to strangers.
One of the finest mosques is paved with red pebbles. And therein is
kept that beautiful copy of the Koran which Othman was reading when he
was murdered; and the stain of his blood is on it yet.”

In this district he came across vestiges of the worship of Baal.
Certain of the fanatical sect called Haïderia lit a fire of wood, ate
of the burning embers, rolled in them, and then trampled them with bare
feet until all flame was put out. Later on, he saw the same strange
feat done by the same strange sect in India, when there came to a
place near Delhi, where he was encamped, men led by a very black man
and wearing collars and bracelets of iron. “They stayed all night with
us. Their chief asked me for wood to light a fire for them to dance
by, and I requested the deputy-ruler of that part to let them have it.
After the second evening prayer, the pile was lit, and, when the wood
had become burning charcoal, they struck up music and began to dance
into the fire; and they rolled themselves in it. Then their head-man
asked me for a tunic, and I gave him one of very fine make. He put it
on, rolled in the fire, and beat the embers so that the fire ceased to
flare, and it went out. He then brought the tunic to me, and I found
it to be undamaged. And thereat I marvelled greatly.” And between
these two experiences he came across Haïderia in Eastern Persia at
Turbet-Haïdarj: “They wore an iron collar, and, what is stranger still,
their _virilia_ are incarcerated to ensure their chastity.”

He now sailed down the united Tigris and Euphrates and along the coast
of Persia in a small boat, and, landing at a port, travelled across
the plains of Southern Persia, with high mountains right and left. He
found the ways in mountainous Lâristân cut through the rocks. These
parts were governed by a tributary ruler. “In every one of the stations
in this country are cells made ready for those bent on religious
undertakings and for travellers. Every newcomer is provided with bread,
flesh, and sweetmeats.” After two months of travel, Batûta came to
Ispahan, in the heart of Persia. The Sultan had already provided him
with money to cover the cost of his wanderings in Persia. Eastern
rulers regarded munificence as a duty: Eastern travellers claimed it as
a right. From Ispahan he went southward to Shiraz, which he found a
large and well-built city, but inferior to Damascus. “The inhabitants
are honest, religious, and virtuous, especially the women. I went
thither in order to visit that paragon of saints and of those that
have the power to work miracles, Majd Oddîn. I put up therefore at the
College which he founded. He was judge of the City: but, being advanced
in years, his brother’s sons took on his duties for him.... He is much
venerated by the Emirs of that land, so that, when they are before him,
they lay hold of both their ears; which is the mark of devotion due to
the Sultan.”

At El Hilla, on the banks of the Euphrates, he found a curious belief
that the last of the Imams was still alive and dwelt there; but that
he was invisible to mortal eye. “Every day, a hundred armed men come
to the portal of the mosque. They lead with them a beast saddled and
bridled; and a gathering of folk beat drums and blow trumpets. They cry
aloud: ‘Come forth, Lord of the Times; for the earth is filled with
evil doing and deeds of shame. Now is the hour for thee to appear, so
that, through thee, Allah may divide the truth from the lie.’ They wait
on until night, when needs must that they go home.”

“It is an uncontrolled truth,” says Swift, “that no man ever made an
ill figure who understood his own talents.” Ibn Batûta, theologian,
jurist, and, by this time, experienced man of the world, knew his
powers; and one of his powers was knowing how to employ the rest. We
now find him accompanying the Tartar Ruler of Persia, the “Sultan of
the Two Iraks and Khôrasân, to Tabriz, whither the monarch marched with
his army.” Tabriz is not more than a hundred miles from Armenia and the
Caspian Sea. Batûta tells us how his eyes were dazzled by the lustre of
precious jewels which well-dressed slaves purchased to decorate their
Tartar mistresses. The Sultan gave him a fine dress and other handsome
presents; and he resolved to make a second pilgrimage to Mecca;
whereupon the Sultan ordered that he should be provided with all that
was necessary to further such a worthy end. But, before starting he had
time to travel along the banks of the Tigris as far north as Diarbekir;
for he wished to visit a saint and worker of miracles, reputed “not to
break his fast during forty days at a stretch, save with a crust of
barley bread.” On getting back to Bagdad he found the caravan ready to
start, and took his departure with it.

Persia, exhausted by the long struggle with the Roman Empire, fell
an easy prey to the Arabs; and, although it enjoyed a second era of
power and prosperity under the Caliphs of Bagdad, first Seljuk Turks
conquered it, and then Mongolians, under Chinghiz Khân, which, being
interpreted, is the Great Khân, no other than the “Tartre Cambyuskan”
of Chaucer’s Squire’s Tale, the “Cambuscan” bold of Milton’s II
Penseroso. Mongolians had now possessed the land for little less than
a century, and they and the Sultans of Egypt held each other in dread.
Religious differences have always been convenient as a war-cry; and,
from of old, religious unity has been wont to fulfil some of the
functions of our modern patriotism. The Caliph at Cairo was the head of
the Orthodox Sunnites, Moslems who hold the Sunna, or body of tradition
which professes to preserve such teaching and laws as the Prophet gave
by word of mouth as of equal authority with the Koran; but the Tartar
Sultan of Persia was a Shiite, or one of those who reject the Sunna,
and hold that Ali, son-in-law of the Prophet, was Mohammed’s legitimate
successor. Hence Batûta found the Shiite Sultan putting pressure on the
Sunnites of the great cities of Bagdad, Shiraz, and Ispahan to make
them renounce the form of faith sacred to them because it was that of
their fathers and further endeared because the Caliphate at Bagdad had
brought such lustre to the Persian name.

Our pilgrim arrived at Mecca, for the second time, without meeting with
any remarkable adventure in crossing Central Arabia. One is surprised
to find so restless a spirit content to remain three years in Mecca.
But Batûta was a theologian and jurist; one, moreover, who held the
outward observances of Islam in high respect; and he dwelt during the
whole of that time at a Mohammedan theological school. And now the old
passion for travel returns, and he is completely in its grip. He is
away to Jidda on the Red Sea, embarks on one of those Eastern ships
which were even more wretchedly built and worse navigated than those
of the Western nations, and is forced by tempest into a port between
Aidhab and Suakin. Nothing daunted, he puts to sea again and arrives in
Arabia the Happy. A Cadi welcomes the distinguished sage and traveller,
entertains him for three days, and, on the fourth, takes him to the
court of the Sultan at Zebid, one of the chief towns of Yemen. Batûta a
true Oriental delights in pomp and ceremony, and describes the audience
in full.

“The Sultan is to be saluted by touching the ground with forefinger,
raising it to the head, and saying ‘May Allah give thee enduring rule.’
This I did, copying the Cadi; who seated himself at the right hand of
the Sultan, and told me to be seated facing him. The monarch sat on a
daïs, which was covered with ornamental silk stuff; and right and left
of him stood his warriors. Around him are sword and buckler-bearers;
nearer are bowmen; and in front of these, on either side, the
chamberlain, the first men of the State, and the private scribe.
Djandar, the Emir, is also present before him and the officers of the
guard; but the latter keep their distance. When the Sultan takes his
seat, all cry aloud, ‘In the name of Allah!’ and they repeat this when
he rises; so that all who are in the Hall of Audience know precisely
when he sits down and when he rises. Directly the Monarch is seated,
all those who are wont to visit the Court and do him obeisance, come
in and salute him. This done, each takes his allotted place to right
or left, nor does he leave it or sit down unless commanded to do so.
In the latter case, the Sultan says to the Emir Djandar, who is Chief
Constable of the Palace, ‘Tell such an one to be seated.’ And the man
so commanded comes forward a little way and sits down on a carpet in
front of and between those who are grouped to right and left. Meats
are then brought forth; and these are of two kinds, one kind being for
the many, the other kind for people of importance, that is to say, the
Sultan, the Chief Justice, the principal Sheriffs, jurisconsults and
guests. The other sort of viands serves for the rest of the Sheriffs,
jurisconsults, judges, sheiks, emirs, and officers of the army.
Everyone takes the place allotted to him at the feast and everybody has
room enough. I found the same form observed at the Court of the Sultan
of India; and I know not which monarch hath copied it from the other.”

After visiting several cities of Yemen, which were flourishing centres
of trade at that time, Batûta reached Aden, “a large city, but without
water, and nothing can grow there. Rain is caught and stored up in
tanks, and that is the only water to drink. But rich traders make their
abode in Aden, and hither vessels come from India.”

Now the Arabs had sought for wealth in the products of Ethiopia; they
had advanced along the Eastern Coast of Africa, and had established
ports considerably south of Zanzibar. Batûta had a fancy to see these
tropical parts; so he sailed from Aden as far as Kiloa or Kilwa, which
is nine degrees south of the equator. The ship touched at various
ports where there were Arab settlements; some of them by no means
salubrious or agreeable. At Zeila, he experienced “an unbearable stench
from decaying fish and the blood of camels, which are slaughtered
in the streets:” At another station, Mogdishu, he was received with
much civility. “When a ship draws up, the young men of the place come
forth, and each accosts a trader, and becomes his host. Should there
be a theologian or a man of station on board, he is taken to dwell
with the Cadi. When it was known that I was there, the Cadi came to
the beach, and his students with him, and I took up my abode with him.
He led me to the Sultan who is styled the Sheik.... A servant brought
vegetables and fawfel-nut ... and rose-water to us ... and this is the
highest honour that can be done to a stranger.... The people are far
too fat, because they gorge. One of them will eat as much as a whole
congregation of worshippers ought to do.” From Mogdishu, the ship went
on to Mombasa and Kiloa for a cargo of ivory. Batûta tells us of the
productions of tropical East Africa, and how “the greatest gift to the
peoples here is ivory, which is the tooth of the elephant.”

From Kiloa, he coasted back to the straits of Bab-el-Mandel, ran along
the Gulf of Aden, and landed at Zafar, in Oman. He tells us, as does
Marco Polo, how the natives feed their cattle on fish. Zafar “is a
filthy place, plagued with flies by reason of the markets for fish and
dates. Copper and tin pieces of money are used. The heat is so great
that those who dwell there must bathe several times a day; and they
suffer greatly from elephant’s leg (elephantiasis) and from ruptures.
It is indeed beyond a marvel that they will hurt no one unless it be to
return some hurt done to them. Many Sultans have tried to subdue them,
yet naught but bale have they gotten thereby.”

Batûta travelled past the shores of Oman in a small coaster which
touched at many ports. He found the banana, the betel-tree, and the
cocoa-nut flourishing in this corner of Arabia, and describes them
and their uses. Wishing to see what the hinterland was like, he took
a seven-days’ journey from the coast, but found that it took six days
to cross a desert. The inland people would seem hardly to have emerged
from primitive promiscuity; for he tells us that “there wives are most
base and husbands shew no sign of jealousy.” Jealousy as to the harem
is an excellent masculine virtue to our good Moslem.

Crossing the Persian Gulf, the island of Hormuz was reached, whither
traders had recently migrated from old Hormuz on the Persian mainland.
Vases and lamp-stands of rock-salt were among the manufactures of
this important mart and port of call; and hard by were the renowned
fisheries for “orient pearl.” He was told, and believed, that the
divers remained two hours under water, and was astounded to see people
amusing themselves by crawling from orbit to orbit of the battered
skull of a spermaceti whale which had been washed ashore.

Crossing the narrow strait to Persia, he hired an escort of Turkoman
settlers, “a hardy and brave race, who occupy these parts and know
the roads. Without them, there is no travelling.” His object in
returning to Persia was to visit a man of saintly repute who dwelt
far away in Lâristân. It took four days to cross a waterless desert
where the Simoon blows in summer, “and kills everyone in its path;
and their limbs drop away from the trunk.” At Lar, the capital, he
found the saint in his cell, seated on the ground. He was clad in an
ancient garment made of wool. Yet he was in the habit of giving costly
presents, and had food and fresh clothing ready for all who visited
him.




CHAPTER V

TO INDIA BY WAY OF CONSTANTINOPLE AND THE STEPPES


Batûta joined the Persian Caravan to Mecca, and once again journeyed
across the territory of the Wahabi in Central Arabia. This, his third
pilgrimage, over, he resolved to see India. But the wretched ship in
which he put forth was storm-tossed, and finally driven into a little
port on the Egyptian coast. So he made across the desert, seeing, now
and again, the tents of a few wandering Arabs or an ostrich or gazelle.
After much hardship, he reached Syene and travelled once more along the
banks of the Nile to Cairo. And now the fancy seized him to revisit
Asia Minor, see Southern Russia and Turkestan, and get to India over
the Hindu Kûsh. He retraced his old route through Palestine and Syria
as far as Latakia. There he embarked on a Genoese vessel for Alâia, on
the south coast of Asia Minor, which he calls “Rûm, because it belonged
of yore to the Romans; and, to this day many of them dwell here under
the protection of the Moslems.” He was now farther north than he had
been before. One of the petty Sultans gave him and those who were with
him the usual gracious greeting of the East, and furnished them with
provisions. On reaching Anatolia, he found the country broken up into a
multitude of contending States, many of these being held by Turkomans.
The secular efforts of the keepers of wandering herds on the Steppes
of Asia to settle in the rich, civilized countries of Europe and Asia
had established the nomad in Persia and Asia Minor. Successive waves of
conquest had swept over the fair lands south of the Oxus and Caspian,
and, one by one, the victorious tribes settled down and received a
higher civilization than their own from the subjugated tillers of the
soil. But now the Empire of the Seljuk Turks was broken into fragments.
Among the new rulers the Ottoman Turks, a small class of the tribe of
Oghuz, were gradually and with difficulty gaining territory and power
in Asia Minor. But there was as yet no hint that they were destined
to inherit the Roman Empire of the East and to rule from the Danube
to the Euphrates. Some of these little States were ancient provinces,
with splendid and busy cities that rivalled Cairo in wealth and beauty.
Some were carved out of the mouldering Byzantine Empire; some had
been torn from Persia. There were also solitary fortresses and towns
held by Turkomans who lived by rapine and piracy; and some States
only preserved their precarious existence by the aid of a force of
slaves who had been purchased or torn from their Christian parents in
childhood and rigidly trained to military life. These Mamelukes were
sent by their overlord, the Sultan of Egypt.

Yet the tradition of good government was far from being lost. The new
rulers were vigorous and prudent. It would seem that one of the secrets
of Ottoman success lay in that close supervision of subordinates which
recent conquest requires. Consequently, on the whole, the country was
prosperous. Batûta found that the ruler of one province never remained
more than a month in one place. He moved about to inspect fortresses
and see the condition of various districts. This man had besieged a
city for twelve years. It is not without precedent in Moslem history
for a siege to last longer than that of Troy; a fact which shows how
little the husbandman was interfered with in these local wars. Even
in France at the close of the Dark Ages, the tiller of the soil was
safe from the invader of his field if he laid his hand on the plough.
Batûta wandered at large, and was received in all places with warm
hospitality. On landing, he took up his abode in the college of a
sheik; and, on the second day, a poorly-clad man came to invite him
and those who were with him to a feast. He wondered “how so poor a
man could bear the charges of feasting us, who were many.” The sheik
explained that the man was one of a society of silk-merchants who had
a “cell” of their own. The guests were received with much courtesy
and hospitality, and were liberally, supplied with money to cover
their travelling expenses. Batûta learned that, in every town of the
Turkomans, there was constituted a brotherhood of young men to supply
strangers with food and other necessaries. A president, styled The
Brother, was elected by those of the same trade, and even a foreigner
might occupy the post. Each guild built a “cell” for itself in which
food, a saddled steed, and all that might be wanted by travellers was
stored. One of the duties of a President was to call daily on the
members of his guild or brotherhood, and assist them in their diverse
needs. Every evening the brotherhood returned his call; and whatsoever
had not been needed was sold to support the “cell.” Should any
traveller have arrived during the day, he was entertained. Otherwise
“the brotherhood of youths” spent the evening in song, dance, and
feast. On one occasion, directly Batûta’s party arrived at the gate of
a city, two knots of men rushed to seize the bridles of their horses,
and there was a struggle between them. This proceeding greatly alarmed
the travellers, the more so that none of them was able to speak the
language. But a man who knew Arabic came forward to assure them that
there was no cause for fear. The rival parties were two brotherhoods
disputing as to which should entertain the travellers. The antagonists
cast lots, and the travellers went to the cell of one guild on the
first day and to that of the other guild the next day. At another time,
Batûta put up at the “cell” of one who was a member of a society of
youths and who had a great number of disciples distinguished by their
coarse ragged mantles and closely fitting hose. The petty Sultans, too,
would provide horses or provisions.

The ruler of Bigni, a man proud of the possession of “a stone which had
fallen from heaven,” gave Batûta gold, clothes, two horses and a slave.
Although a severe Sunnite, our traveller shows no great religious
hatred to Shiites, Jews, or Christians; but he liked to keep heretics
and infidels in their place. He tells a story which is instructive as
to the medical attainments of the Jew and the relations between Jew and
Moslem. At Bigni an old man came and saluted the Sultan. All rose to
do him honour. “He sat himself on the daïs, opposite the Sultan, and
the readers of the Koran were below him. I asked the sage, ‘who is this
sheik?’ He smiled and kept silent; but when I asked again, he replied:
‘he is a Jewish physician of whom we all have need. That is why we rose
when he came in.’ Whereat I fumed, and said to him: ‘thou dog, son of a
dog, how darest thou, a mere Jew, to seat thyself above the readers of
the Koran?’ I had raised my voice, and this astonished the Sultan, who
asked why I had done so. The sage told him, and the Jew was humbled,
and went away very much cast down. When we returned, the sage said to
me: ‘well have you done! Allah bestow his blessing on thee! None other
but thou had dared to speak thus to the Jew. Thou hast taught him to
know his place.’”

Language-difficulty caused some embarassment during this long journey
through Asia Minor; so an interpreter, who had done the pilgrimage to
Mecca and who spoke Arabic, was engaged by Batûta’s party. But the
Hadji cheated them abominably; so one day they asked him what he had
stolen from them that day. The thief, quite unabashed told them the
precise amount; “whereat we could but laugh and put up with it.”

Batûta embarked from Sinope, on the southern shore of the Euxine, for
Sodaia, in the Crimea. Sodaia was one of the great ports of the world.
Venice had established a factory there a century back, but had been
ejected. The Crimea was chiefly in the hands of the Genoese, who
were established at Caffa; but the Italian cities were in pressing
danger of ejection and of losing their Levantine and Euxine trade.
After suffering much distress on the voyage and “only just escaping
from being drowned,” we find Batûta at Caffa; and for the first time
suffering from the annoyance of those Christian bells which have been
a nuisance, not merely to Moslems, but to the more sensitive among
European ears from the days when they were perhaps necessary, yet when
Rabelais objurgated them in his chapter on the “Island of bells,” to
these modern times of clocks and watches. In all these cosmopolitan
towns, each nation occupied a separate fortified quarter. The trade of
Southern Russia was great; and one is surprised to find that horses
were exported to India.

Batûta made across a land where the quiet air was no longer annoyed by
the insistent clang which was an insult at once to his faith and his
ears. He found Southern Russia a plain without hill or tree. Waggons
might travel for six months through a green desert, the silence broken
only by lowing of cattle, hoarse voice of an occasional herdsman,
or languid stir of some collection of huts which passed for a town.
Cattle were protected by severe laws severely enforced. “Should a
beast be stolen, the thief must return it with nine more. If unable to
furnish these, his children are taken into slavery; and, if he have no
children, he is slaughtered like a sheep.... The only fuel is dung.”

Batûta was bent on visiting Uzbek Khân, the powerful Tartar who now
represented the dynasty founded by Chinghiz Khân, the blacksmith. Uzbek
was one of the seven mightiest monarchs of the world, the others being
the Sultan of the West; the Sultan of Egypt and Syria, the Sultan
of the two Iraks (Persia and Mesopotamia), the Khân of Turkestan,
the Sultan of India, and the Emperor of China. Our traveller hired
a waggon, and, after many monotonous days, arrived at the camp of
the Khân. He was amazed to behold “a city in motion; complete in its
streets, mosques, and cooking houses.” Nor was he less bewildered at
the consideration given to women by all men, from the Khân downwards,
and at seeing them going about unveiled, yet “religious, charitable,
and given to good works.” The wife of an Emir would ride, magnificently
attired, in a coach. “Often she is accompanied by her husband; but one
would take him for a mere attendant.” Uzbek Khân was “wont to give
audience on Friday, his four wives, unveiled, sitting enthroned to
right and left of him, a son on either side, and a daughter in front.
Princes and Emirs are gathered around. People enter into the presence
in order of rank. When a wife comes in, he takes her by the hand and
leads her to her throne. Each wife has a separate abode; and not to
visit these ladies is looked upon as a breach of good manners.” It is
evident that the ancestral habits of a nomadic people were carefully
preserved under conditions which were rapidly changing. The Sultan sent
his visitor a horse, a sheep, and koumiss in a leathern bottle.

Batûta wished to see for himself the great change in the length of day
and night which takes place as one travels northward. So Uzbek sent
him to far-distant Bulgar, on the Volga, a place in the latitude of
Newcastle. Here he was told of a “Land of Darkness,” which lay forty
days’ journey to the North. “Traders alone go there; and only in big
companies. Dogs draw them over the ice in sledges; and the travellers
must take all food and wood for fuel with them. The dogs are fed before
anyone, and experienced dogs, who have done the journey several times,
are chosen to lead the pack. On arriving at the proper place, each
trader puts down his goods and retires. Next day, he finds furs put
down as barter. Should he be content with these, he carries them off;
but should he not be satisfied, he leaves them where they are, and more
are added. But sometimes the natives will take back their own goods,
and leave those of the traders. The traders never see anyone, and know
not whether they deal with human beings or with demons.” Strange as
this practice seems, there is other evidence that exchange of goods was
made in this way in very high latitudes. Sledge-dogs were used very
much farther south than they are to-day. Batûta speaks of the Russians
as being “Christians with red hair, blue eyes, ugly, faithless, and
rich in silver shrines.”

When Batûta returned to Uzbek, he went on to Astrakhan with him. “Here
the Sultan dwells in very cold weather.... The city is on one of the
great rivers of the world (the Volga), which is crossed by laying
thousands of bundles of hay on the ice.”

Now, the third of Uzbek’s four wives was a daughter of the Christian
Emperor of Constantinople. History makes no mention of this lady; but
there is no reason to doubt the fact, however surprising; for, since
1265 A.D. the Byzantine Emperor had more than once given a natural
daughter or legitimate sister in marriage to powerful Mongolian
Sovereigns, in order to get their support against the encroaching Turks
of Asia Minor.

This particular lady was expecting her confinement and desired to
return home for the event. She had requested the Khân to allow her to
do so, and he had sanctioned the journey. Batûta saw an opportunity of
seeing the famous Christian metropolis, if the Khân would allow him
to join the escort. Such a petition from a foreign stranger naturally
aroused suspicion as to his motives; but Batûta was skilful in allaying
this; and we find him setting forth with a parting gift from the Khân
of a fine dress, several horses, and cash. Even the Khân’s ladies and
his sons and daughters gave him presents. The princess was escorted
by 500 horse and 4,500 foot. The Khân, accompanied by his head-wife
and heir-apparent rode with her the first stage; the heir-apparent and
his suite went on the next stage of a journey that took two months.
For some reason or other a very round-about route was chosen; first a
waterless, uninhabited waste was crossed; then the Caucasus approached
to within a day’s march. When a border-fortress was reached, the escort
returned; and now the real motive of the lady becomes discernable. The
unhappy woman had been the victim of state-craft, a puppet danced off
to a semi-barbarian husband in the interests of Constantinople. In
spite of the respect paid to women in her new abode, she was heartily
sick of Tartar discomfort and Moslem ways. Accustomed to the luxurious
ease and refinements of the Byzantine Court, she loathed the uncouth
manners of a half-tamed people and their rough life. She sighed for the
amenities of her father’s palace and the high civilization of his city.
She left her travelling mosque at the fortress, drank wine, and is said
to have eaten swine’s flesh. From Batûta’s point of view, she relapsed
into infidelity; yet he has no bitter word to cast at her. When a
day’s journey from her native city, a younger brother came to meet her
with 5,000 cavalry, all in shining armour. Next day the heir-apparent
arrived with 10,000 cavalry, and when quite near to Constantinople,
the greater part of the population turned out, decked in their best,
and shouting so that it was difficult to decide whether they or the
drums made most noise. The parents came forth from the gate in full
royal state, and the poor released princess threw herself on the ground
before them, kissed it, and even kissed the hooves of their horses. All
the bells of Constantinople were a-ringing, and the royal party entered
the city with glittering pomp.

Batûta was unwilling to enter “Istambûl” without the Emperor’s special
sanction; it was not too safe a place for a Moslem. Andronicus
Palæologus the Younger gave him a safe-conduct; but he was searched
for concealed arms at the fifth gate—a practice which, afterwards, he
found to obtain in India. As he passed through the gateways the guards
muttered: “Saracens! Saracens!” And Saracens they had indeed occasion
to hold in mortal horror and dread.

Our pilgrim-traveller gets sadly muddled about names and dates just
here. Evidently, he derived the information he gives us from a Jew,
who acted as interpreter, and who either spoke Arabic imperfectly
or heartily enjoyed “pulling his leg.” And as to dates, just here,
Batûta’s memory fails him a little. He was told that the Pope of
Rome paid an annual visit to Santa Sophia, and was received with
the greatest veneration and ceremonial. And he calls the Emperor
Andronicus, “George.” Andronicus plied him with eager questions as to
Jerusalem and the Holy Places of Palestine. He only saw the outside of
Santa Sophia.

Now, the Princess made open objection to return to her husband, and had
her will. She gave Batûta a money-present for his services; but the
Byzantine Empire was in decay, and, to his loss in exchange, the coins
debased. He returned Eastward with a small escort, and met Uzbek Khân
at Sara. We read in Dan Chaucer how

  “At Sarray, in the land of Tartarye
   Ther dwelt a king that werreyed Russye.”

Nothing will content him but to see those famous cities beyond the
Oxus, and Balk, with its great mosque of the precious pillars, before
he proceeds to India. He travels 40 days through a desert. The whole
district is one vast desolation; and he tells us how Chinghiz Khân,
the blood-stained blacksmith, a conquering hero, a strict Moslem, and
therefore “a man of liberal mind,” subdued district after district
until he was lord of China and the Middle East; how he carried off the
youth of Bokhâra and Samarkand, Khôrasân and Irak, and slaughtered and
pillaged so that he left nothing but ruin behind him. Batûta visited
the Great Khân of Turkestan and more than one camp of petty rulers.

“The purple robe makes Emperors, not priests,” said Ambrose the Bishop
of Milan to the Emperor Theodosius; and the Emperor remarked how hard
it was for a ruler to meet with an outspoken and unfearing man. Batûta
tells us of an amusing incident which indicates, not merely how an
imam could be outspoken to a king, but also that, if Mohammedanism
had admitted of a sacerdotal hierarchy, the same exercise of priestly
authority which cast Theodosius prostrate and weeping before the Altar
at Milan and kept Heinrich shivering in the snows of Canossa, while
awaiting the condescension of Hildebrand, would have obtained in the
Moslem as in the Christian world. When Tirim Siri Khân wished prayers
to be delayed until he should come to the mosque, the imam bade the
messenger return to the Khân and ask him whether prayers were ordered
of God or of him, and commanded the muezzin to summon the faithful as
usual. After the second prostration the Khân arrived, meekly remained
at the doorway, and joined in the prayers. When worship was over, he
grasped the hand of the imam, who laughed heartily, and the twain
sat together afterwards, Batûta being with them. The Khân told the
traveller to declare to his countrymen how the Ruler of the Turkomans
had sat with a poor man of the poorest Persians. This worthy imam lived
by the labour of his hands, and refused all the gifts his sovereign
offered him. No wonder that warm friendship sprang up between these two
men, and that both were respected and obeyed. But greater regard was
paid to the statutes than to this monarch even; for, after Batûta left,
Tirim Siri broke a law laid down by his grandfather and therefore was
deposed.

In one province he found “a laudable practice. A whip is hung up in
every mosque, and whoever stays away from worship is beaten by the imam
before all the congregation, and fined to boot, the fine going towards
the upkeep of the mosque.” The time came when Batûta, clothed with
authority, itched to exercise it in the same praiseworthy way.

Batûta now visits Herat, turns north-westward to Meshed, the capital
of Khôrasân and holy city of the Shiites, thence travels to Jam, the
birthplace of Jami, the Persian poet, and at Tus finds the tomb of the
Caliph Haroun-al-Raschid, who died there when on a military expedition.
Now, Haroun-al-Raschid was a Sunnite; so the orthodox “place lighted
candles on his grave, but the followers of Ali (Shiites) are wont to
give it a kick.” One recalls the story of how, when the Indian Emperor
had his attention drawn to a dog defiling the grave of a heretic, he
remarked that “the beast resembles orthodoxy.” Heterodox or orthodox,
according to point of view, here were flourishing colleges filled with
students, and saintly men dwelling in secluded cells. To work miracles
has always been a distinction of the saint; but the Eastern saint was
also permitted to live on to an age incredibly ripe. Batûta is always
running across some man of the age attained by old Parr, and upwards. A
century and a half is a moderate number of years for these holy beings,
and Batûta accepts it as veridical; especially when corroborative
evidence is given. But three and a half centuries claimed by a man who
is no Struldbrug, but looks not more than fifty, staggers even him. The
impostor assures his visitor that every century he grows a fresh crop
of hair and cuts a new set of teeth, and that he had been a Râja who
was buried at Multân in the Punjâb. “I very much doubted as to what he
might really be; and I do so to this day.”




CHAPTER VI

AN EASTERN DESPOT


He waited forty days for the snows to melt on the “Hindu Kûsh—the
Slayer of the Hindus, so called because most of the slaves brought from
India die here of the bitter cold thereof.” The Afghans were at that
time subjects of the Khân of Turkestan (Transoxiana); a turbulent,
violent race, impatient of the slightest curb. Bandits attacked the
party he joined in the Kâbul pass; but bow and arrow kept them at a
distance. Fierce invaders had poured down the mountain passes from
Afghanistan from the end of the twelfth century and established a
Mohammedan Empire at Delhi.

Batûta passed into Sind. At the Indian border the usual written
description of his personal appearance and the object of his visit was
sent to the Sultan. There was a system of stations at a short distance
from each other, and couriers of the Sultan went to and fro, some on
horseback, some on foot. To secure rapid transit, each courier was
provided with bells attached to a whip, so as to announce his approach
to a station and to warn the courier there to be ready to go on with
the royal despatch.

Now, the Mohammedan Sultan of Northern India was a striking
illustration of the fact that humanity is not necessarily coupled
with generosity. Mohammed Tughlak was renowned throughout the Moslem
world for his lavish munificence; but the cold-blooded cruelty of the
despot was not less great than his bounty. Batûta not merely wished to
see India; he hoped to achieve lucrative establishment at the Moslem
Court. At Multân he found a body of adventurers, who sought to place
their talents at the service of the Sultan, and awaited his invitation
to court. Any shipwrecked sailor, even, had only to make his way to
Mohammed Tughlak to be relieved. Batûta has tales of him which we may
believe at our pleasure. The Sultan told one of his courtiers to go
to the treasury and take away as much gold as he could carry. He took
so much that he fell under its weight. The Sultan ordered the coins to
be gathered together, weighed, and sent to him. Once he had one of his
Emirs put into a balance, and gave him his weight in gold, kissing him,
and telling him to bestow alms for his soul’s welfare. He kissed the
feet of a “theologian and gatherer of traditions,” and presented him
with a golden vase filled with gold coins.

On the way, Batûta saw one of the three brothers whom the Sheik at
Alexandria had prophesied he should meet, and found him “a man very
much broken by temptations of the devil. He would not allow any one
to touch his hand or even to draw near him; and, should anyone’s garb
chance to touch his, he washed it immediately.” On the road from
Multân to Delhi, Batûta was most hospitably received by the Emirs. But
Northern India was no more reduced to order by the Mohammedan Sultan
than by the Emperor Sîlâditya in Hiuen-Tsiang’s time. Between Multân
and Delhi, while travelling with a party of twenty-two, Batûta found
two horse and twenty foot opposing their progress. Our pilgrim was
a many-sided man, quite capable of taking his share in a fight. The
robbers lost one of their horsemen and twelve of their foot, and then
fled from the field.

When Ibn Batûta arrived at the Moslem capital, which was ten miles to
the south of the Delhi of our day, he found that the Sultan was not
there. But great honour was done to the man whose fame as theologian,
jurist, traveller and three-fold hadji had preceded him. He was
received and entertained by the Sultan’s Mother and the Vizier, and
received a welcome present of money in return for the presents he had
brought with him.

A month and a half after his arrival a child of one of his numerous
marriages died. She was a little less than a year old. “The vizier
gave her funeral honours as if she had been a child of high rank in
that country, with incense, rose-water, readers of the Koran, and
panegyrists. And the vizier paid all the costs thereof, giving money to
the leaders and food to the poor. This was done by the Sultan’s orders.
And the Dowager Sultana sent for the mother of the child, and gave her
valuable dresses and ornaments; which was much to her solace.”

News now came that the Sultan was drawing near; so the vizier and
others set forth to meet him. Everybody, the adventurers in search of
employment included, bore presents to the palace, of which the sentries
at the palace-gateway took note. When the Sultan arrived, these gifts
were spread out before him, and the travellers were presented to him in
order of rank. Batûta was received with special marks of approval. The
Sultan graciously condescended to take his hand, promised to see to his
interests, and gave him cloth of gold which had adorned his own person.
Each visitor had a horse and silver-saddle sent him, and was appointed
either judge or writer. Batûta was made Judge of Delhi, with a stipend
and the rents of three villages attached to his office. When the
messengers brought news of these appointments, the new functionaries
were expected to kiss the hooves of their horses, go to the palace, and
invest themselves with their robes of office.

Batûta gives an account of the Sultan which is confirmed by Ferishta,
the Moslem historian. Mohammed was a typical Oriental sovereign of
the first order, that is to say, a man of letters and learning,
“approachable, one of the most bountiful of men, splendid in his gifts
(where he took a fancy).” But despotism breeds tyranny, and tyranny,
brutality. “Notwithstanding his humility, justice, kindness to the
poor, and marvellous open-handedness, he was swift to shed blood.
Hardly a day went by without someone being slaughtered before the gates
of his palace. Often have I seen people suffer there, and their bodies
left where they fell. Once, as I rode up, my horse plunged and quivered
with fear. I looked ahead, and saw something white lying on the ground.
I asked what it might be. One who was with me replied: ‘it is the
trunk of a man who has been dismembered.’ It made no difference whether
the offence were great or small; the punishment ordered by the Sultan
was the same. He spared none on account of his learning, his upright
character, or his position. Daily, hundreds of prisoners were brought
to the audience-chamber, arms chained to neck, and feet pinioned.
Some were killed, some tortured, some severely beaten. He sat in his
Audience Hall every day, Fridays excepted, and had everybody in prison
brought before him. But Friday was a day of respite for them; then they
kept calm and purified themselves.

“The Sultan had a brother. Never have I seen a finer man. The monarch
suspected that he had plotted against him. He questioned him concerning
this; and, for fear of being put to the torture, the brother made
avowal. But, in fact, whoever should deny any charge of this kind which
the Sultan might choose to make would most assuredly be put to the
torture; and death is usually chosen. The Sultan had his brother’s head
cut off in the middle of the courtyard, and, as is the custom, there
it remained three days. This man’s mother had been stoned to death in
the same place two years before; for she had confessed to adultery or
some debauchery.... On one occasion, when I was present, some men were
brought forward and charged with having conspired to kill the vizier.
They were sentenced to be thrown to the elephants. These beasts are
trained to put an end to culprits, their feet being shod with steel
with a sharp edge to it. They are guided by riders, take up their
victim with their trunks, hurl him up into the air, thrust him between
their fore-feet, and do to him just what the riders bid them, and
that is whatever the Sultan has ordered. If the command be to cut the
victims to pieces, the elephant shall do this with his tools, and then
shall cast the pieces to the crowd gathered around; but if it be to
leave him, he is flayed before the monarch, his skin stuffed with hay,
and his flesh given to dogs.”

This genial sovereign had craftily contrived to bring about the death
of his father and a brother by the collapse of a pavilion. But the
reign of every Sultan was polluted by parricide or fratricide in the
frantic struggle for the throne. And, even more than has been the case
throughout history, all the ostentation, luxury, and culture of the
Court, the powerful, and the wealthy, was as fine meal ground from the
ear which the humble had sown and reaped. The people were crushed,
enslaved, outraged and despoiled.

A case was brought before our judge which reveals that the trial by
ordeal, of which Hiuen-Tsiang told us, was still employed. A woman
reputed to be a _Goftar_, that is to say, a witch who could kill
anyone by a glance, was brought before Batûta on the charge of having
murdered a child. Not knowing what to do, he sent her on to the vizier,
who ordered four large water-vessels to be tied to her, and the whole
bundle to be thrown into the Jumna. Had she sunk, she would have been
deemed innocent and pulled out. Alas! she floated; so she was taken
away to be burned.

One day, two Yogis, master and disciple, arrived at the Sultan’s court.
Their heads and armpits were bare, the hair having been removed by
means of some kind of powder. They were received with much respect; and
Batûta was treated to an exhibition of that Eastern skill in jugglery
which astonished all ancient travellers. The disciple assumed the
shape of a cube, rose in the air, and floated over the heads of the
spectators. Our judge was so frightened at this uncanny trick that he
fainted. When he came to, the disciple was still up above his head. The
head-conjurer then cast a sandal to the ground. It rebounded, hit the
cube, which descended, and lo! there was the disciple again. Batûta’s
heart beat at such a rate that the Sultan ordered a powerful drug to be
given him, and told him that he should have been shewn more astounding
things, but that he feared for his wits. Probably, however the illusion
was produced, our traveller saw something very much like what he
describes. Marco Polo and other old travellers tell of the astounding
feats they saw, and Jehangir, fourth in succession of the Great Moguls,
devotes several pages of his diary to a careful record of many similar
marvels which he would seem to have observed closely.[9] We shall hear
of something stranger yet, which befel Batûta in China.

Our new-made judge was not only a restless being, but one possessed
by an immoderate desire to do things on a big scale. His qualities
were exaggerate, and a virtue tended to swell into an iniquity. One
pious pilgrimage to the Holy Places did not suffice him: he must visit
them again and again. We shall see how fully he availed himself of
the liberty in marriage, divorce, and concubinage accorded by his
creed. Egoism was a strong element in his character. He could not set
bounds to his expenditure. In a word, he borders on megalomania. In a
short time, his debts are four and a half times his total income. His
excuse is that he was ordered to attend the Sultan in an expedition
to put down an insurrection. Many servants are required in India; but
his retinue was immense. He was ingenious enough to escape from his
difficulties. Mohammed Tughlak plumed himself on his real or supposed
proficiency in Persian and Arabic and on his patronage of letters.
Batûta went to him with a panegyric in Arabic so adroitly expressed
that he charmed His Majesty. Then Batûta laid bare his distress.
The Sultan paid his debts and dismissed him with the same warning
which Mr. Micawber gave David Copperfield. The judge was excused
from accompanying his Master, and was given charge of a tomb and the
theological college attached to it.

Encouraged by the Sultan’s liberality, perhaps incited by his example
in prodigality, and untaught by his recent dilemma, he arranges
everything on a stupendous scale. “I set up 150 readers of the Koran,
80 students, 8 repeaters, a lecturer, 80 conventuals, an imam,
muezzins, reciters selected for their fine rendering, eulogists,
scribes to note down absentees, and ushers. All of these were men
of breeding. And I set up an establishment of menials; such as
footmen, cooks, messengers, water carriers, betel-servers, swordsmen,
javelin-men, umbrella-carriers, hand-washers, criers, and other
officials—460 of them, all told. The Sultan commanded me to supply
12 measures of meal and an equal quantity of meat daily at the tomb.
This seemed to me a pitifully small amount.... I made it 35 measures of
meal, and 35 of meat, and sugar, sugar-candy, butter, and fawfel-nut in
due proportion. Thereby I fed all comers.”

There was some excuse for the expenditure on food. Famine is the
recurrent curse of countries with imperfect means of transport, and
“the land suffered from famine at this time. Thus suffering was
relieved; and fame of it borne afar.” But Batûta does not conceal his
having used money which his friends lent him during his stay at Delhi.
Indeed he vilifies them for expecting him to return any part of it. He
tells his tale in the tone of a man who believes himself to have been
treated ungenerously and unjustly.

Later on in his narrative, he has occasion to refer to the fact that
at some time during the few years of his residence at Delhi he added
to the number of his wives by marrying the daughter of the Emir of
Mobar, in Southern India. “She was a religious woman, who would spend
the whole night in meditation and prayer. She could read, but not
write. She bore me a female child; but what is become of either of
them is beyond my ken.” The indelicacy of the dress of women in Delhi
shocked him: “they merely cover the face, and the body from the navel
downwards only.” He tried to get them to robe themselves completely,
and failed.

                                    “How wretched
  Is that poor man who hangs on princes’ favours!”

It seems that the capricious Sultan had placed much confidence in a
certain holy man; but suspicion of the sheik’s fidelity was aroused,
and spies were set to take note of his visitors. Among his friends and
visitors was Batûta. Everybody on the list was ordered to appear at the
fatal portal. Batûta thought his last hour had come and betook himself
to his prayers; he repeated “God is our succour and exceeding help” no
less than 33,000 times in a single day; he fasted for four days, taking
nothing but water and expecting the executioners every moment. He alone
escaped the fatal scimitar.

He had seen enough of Imperial caprice to know that respite was not
security, or innocence a lasting defence. He resigned his office and
went to a worker of miracles, “the saint and phœnix of his time,” who
was one of his friends. He gave all that he possessed to holy men; put
on the robe of an ascetic, and ate nothing but rice. But the blindfold
goddess had him on her wheel, and was to give it many a turn yet. Five
months passed, and then the Sultan sent for him and gave him a gracious
reception. But he deemed it wise to return to his rigorous life, and
was more severe in it than before. Yet forty more days passed, and then
the Sultan again commanded his presence.

There was now a much greater trade with China than in the time of
Hiuen-Tsiang. An Embassy, headed by a high mandarin, had come from
China (A.D. 1342) with presents of 100 male slaves, 50 slave-girls,
rich dresses, quivers of gold, and jewelled swords. In a certain
lower reach of the Himalaya was a plain which had been overrun by the
Moslem conquerors. Once a Buddhist temple stood there; and Chinese
pilgrims were wont to journey across Thibet to pray at the sacred spot.
Moreover the inhabitants of the district were cut off from their
wonted toil in Thibetan fields beyond the border. The place was secured
by Nature from any attack from the North; and the Great Khân of China
begged that restrictions should be removed and permission given for
the temple to be rebuilt. The Sultan was willing to grant the request
on certain pecuniary conditions, but he cast about for some one to
accompany the returning embassy and represent him at the Chinese Court.
Who so suitable as Batûta, a man of the world, experienced in travel,
highly educated, and sharp-witted? His innocence was established. Such
a degree of asceticism, so long endured, was proof of piety. The Sultan
ordered him to go. The garb of the ascetic was thrown off. He would
feel more secure in China than at Delhi.




CHAPTER VII

PERILS BY LAND AND SEA


Our ambassador sets off with the returning mission attended by two
favourites of the Sultan, and a guard of 1,000 horse. He has charge of
gifts which far surpass the Chinese presents—100 horses of the best
breed, richly caparisoned, 100 Hindu singing and dancing girls, robes
of rich brocade, jewelled arms, instruments of gold and silver, silks
and stuffs, and 1,700 rich dresses.

He has not travelled 100 miles from Delhi when he finds a district in
revolt against the Mohammedan conquerors. The Hindus are besieging a
city; the cavalry attending the embassy rushes at the investing forces,
loses many men, but leaves not an enemy alive. The news is sent to
the Sultan, and a halt is made for his instructions to arrive. Batûta
is sitting in the grateful shade of a garden when word comes that a
fresh body of Hindus is attacking a village hard by. He rides off with
an escort to see how he may help. The insurgents are already fleeing
from a hot pursuit, and he finds himself left with only five others
and a few mounted men. His horse gets its fore-feet wedged between
some stones, and he has to dismount; his companions ride off, and he
finds himself alone. Suddenly, two score of the enemy’s horse appear
and ride at him. He is stripped to the skin, bound, and threatened
with death. He is unable to talk the language of his captors, is kept
a captive during two days, and then they ride away. He shuffles off
to a neighbouring jungle, and hides there. He cautiously tries every
foot-track to find that not one of them but leads to some enemy village
or to some village in ruins. He keeps himself alive by sucking wild
fruit and chewing leaves. Seven days have passed, and he is quite
exhausted, when he sees “a black man, carrying a small water-vessel
and walking by aid of an iron-tipped staff.” The man is a Mohammedan,
and gives him water and pulse, which he has with him. Batûta tries
to walk with him; but he is too weak and faint; his feet totter,
and he falls to the ground. The “black man” throws him across his
shoulders; all consciousness is lost, and he comes to himself at the
Imperial gateway one daybreak, the East aglow with the rising sun. That
good Samaritan, the “black man,” stands out in bright relief from a
background of crime and cruelty and shadows of feet swift to shed blood.

Mohammed Tughlak received Batûta more kindly than ever, gave him
handsome compensation, and commanded him to return to the Embassy. On
his way to Cambay, we hear more of Yogi magicians and how they will
remain long time without food. “I have seen, in the city of Mangalore,
a Moslem who had learned of these folk. A sort of platform was set
up for him; and thereon he had stayed 25 days, neither eating nor
drinking. Thus did I leave him; and I know not how long he kept there
afterwards. It is said that they make up pills, and, after swallowing
one of them, can do without food or drink. They foretell hidden things.
The Sultan honours them and admits them to his society. Some among
them eat vegetable food only; and these are the greater number. There
are among them those who can slay a man by a glance at him. The common
people hold that, if the chest of the dead man be opened, no heart is
to be found within; for it has been consumed. Women do this in the
main, and such an one is called a hyæna.”

Batûta’s chief interest was in Islam; but he noted natural products
carefully and was alive to the odd. North of the Hindu Kûsh he had seen
a woefully obese man; and now, on this 1,500 mile journey to Calicut,
he came across the ruler of a small State, “a black giant,” who thought
little of devouring a whole sheep at a sitting.

He took ship near Goa, and the craft ran along the Malabar coast, “the
land of black pepper.” Twelve kinglets ruled as many states in Malabar
at that time, and each king had an army of from 5,000 to 50,000 men at
his command. Many ancient polyandric practices were retained; which
explains why each Râja was succeeded by a sisters’ son. No landing was
made until a king’s son had been handed over as a pledge of safety.
Many Arab traders had settled in the ports, and become wealthy.
Punishment, swift and severe, followed on the smallest infringement of
_meum_ and _tuum_. We are told how a Hindu noble, out riding with his
father-in-law, who was no less a personage than the Râja, picked up a
mango which had dropped from an overhanging tree. The Râja ordered that
both he and the mango should be cut into two halves, and half of the
mango and half of the culprit laid on either side of the public way
precisely where the enormity had been done. One may suspect that the
son-in-law was not wholly _persona grata_ to the despot.

The Embassy had to tide over three months at Calicut awaiting the
season for the sailing of the fleet of junks from China. There were
thirteen of them at Calicut, and they also traded to Hili and Quilon.
He tells us that the biggest junks were as floating cities. They would
carry a crew of 1,000 men, whereof 400 were soldiers. The junk was
worked by oars and sails of bamboo-matting, slung from masts varying
in number from three to twelve, according to the size of the junk. Ten
to thirty men stood to pull at each oar. Garden-herbs and ginger were
grown on deck, and on it, too, were houses built for the chief officers
and their wives. The quarters of the junk were three-fold, fastened
together by spikes. Each junk of the biggest size was accompanied by
three tenders of progressively diminishing proportions. Needless to
say, the commander of a junk was a very important functionary. Often
more than one junk would be owned by a single Chinaman. But then,
“truly the Chinese are the wealthiest people on earth.”

Our ambassador sent his servants, slave-girls and baggage on board; but
the cabin was too small to hold both concubines and luggage; so the
skipper advised him to hire a _kakam_ or junk of the third size. This
he did on a Thursday, the _kakam_ took in its cargo, and he remained on
shore the next day for public worship.

During the night, the terror of the sea fell on them all. A violent
storm came on, and the waters shook the land. Some of the junks
contrived to get away from the perilous neighbourhood of the shore
to more open water; but one of them was wrecked, and only a few
swimmers managed to escape. The _kakam_, with all his worldly goods
and slave-concubines in it, had disappeared; but it had been seen
making for the open. The body of an envoy was washed ashore, with the
skull smashed in. A guardian Eunuch was also cast up, a nail driven
right through the brain from temple to temple. Down came the Zamorin
to the scene of disaster, Comedy attendant on Tragedy, for he braved
the tempest clad with a loin-cloth, the scantiest of head-gear, and
a necklace of jewels, but the insignium of royalty, the umbrella,
was somehow held up over his sacred head. Batûta cast himself on his
prostration-carpet, which was all that was left to him, excepting ten
pieces of gold and his servant, a freed slave, who immediately made
off. Some pious people gave him small coin, which he kept as treasure,
for it would bring blessing with it.

We are told of the noble deed of a simple Moslem sailor during this
great storm. “There was a girl on board who was the favourite of a
merchant. The merchant offered ten pieces of gold to anyone who should
save her. A sailor, hailing from Hormuz, did save her; but he refused
the reward, saying, ‘I did it for the love of God.’”

The junk which held the precious gifts for China was seen to go down
outside the port; and Batûta heard that the little boat which held all
his slave-concubines and worldly goods had contrived to gain the open
sea, and might conceivably put in at Quilon. He set off at once, and
arrived there after a ten days’ journey. He found the Chinese Embassy
there. They had suffered shipwreck, but their junk had not broken up
and was being refitted.

It did not require the advice proferred him by his co-religionists to
deter him from returning to the capricious, passionate lord of Delhi.
He bethought him of Jamâl Oddîn, ruler of Honowar, a man of sense and
understanding, whom he had visited on his way to Calicut. It casts a
pleasant ray on the Mohammedan occupation of India, that there were
no fewer than 44 schools set up in the busy little capital of a small
State, and that of these no fewer than 11 were for girls. Now Jamâl
Oddîn knew the uncertain temper of the Lord of India quite as well
as Batûta, and did not give him too hearty a welcome. So to appease
offended Heaven, or to rehabilitate himself by an evidence of piety,
he repaired to a mosque and read the Koran from end to end once, and
ultimately twice, a day. Now, there were 52 ships being fitted out to
attack the island of Sindâbûr; and Jamâl evidently thought that Batûta
might prove useful, for he commanded him to accompany him on this
expedition. Batûta tried to read the future by a time-honoured method
of divination. He opened the Koran at random, and his eye fell on a
promise of Allah to aid his servant. This was satisfactory to Jamâl
Oddîn as well as to himself.

After strenuous resistance Sindâbûr was carried by assault, and Batûta,
who was something of a warrior, received a slave-girl, clothing and
other presents from his patron. He remained on the island with Jamâl
Oddîn for some months, and then got permission to go to Calicut. For
the Chinese fleet would be returning to India by this time, and he
might get news of his little junk. At Calicut, he learned that his
_kakam_ had reached China, that his property had been divided up, and
that his pretty concubine had died on the voyage. “I felt very much
grief for her.” He went back to the island to find the city besieged
by Hindus.

Now he had heard marvellous things concerning the Maldives, an
archipelago of small islands lying S.S.E. of India, near the equator.
The inhabitants, under British rule to-day, had accepted Islam. He
found that before he or anyone was allowed to land he must show himself
on deck; “for although the islands are multitudinous, each lies close
to its neighbour, and folk knew one another by sight.” He speaks of
the inhabitants as “pious, peaceable, and chaste. They never wage war.
Prayers are their only weapons. Indian pirates do not alarm them; nor
do they punish robbers; for they have learned that sudden and grievous
ill will come to evil-doers. When any of the pirate-ships of infidel
Hindus pass by these islands, whatsoever is found is taken, nor will
anyone stand out.” But, in spite of the moral reflection indulged in by
the islanders, Batûta traces their policy of non-resistance to physical
feebleness. And “there is one exception to it. Should a single lemon be
taken woe befals the offender. He is punished and forced to listen to
a homily. The natives delight in perfumes and in bathing twice a day,
which the heat forces them to do; yet trees give delicious shade. Their
trade is in ropes, which they make of hemp, and which are used for
sewing together the timbers of ships of India and Yemen; for if a ship
strike against a rock, the hemp allows of its yielding, and so saves it
from going to pieces, which is not the case when iron nails are used.
Shells are used for coin, and palm-leaves are used for all writing,
except for copying out the Koran; and the instrument used has a sharp
point.”

Batûta sailed among these islands during ten days, and took up his
abode on one, the sovereign of which was a woman. For the lady’s
husband had died, leaving no male issue; so she married her vizier who,
in reality, ruled. Batûta took the full license accorded in Islam.
He married the four legal wives permitted, and took to himself some
concubines also, “all pleasant in conversation and of great beauty.”
He must have divorced his previous wives before being able to do this.
Marriage in the Maldive Islands was facile and cheap. Only a small
dowry was demanded for a handsome woman; but it was required that
the stranger should divorce the wife on leaving the land, and by no
means take her with him. But, should he not desire to marry, there
was no difficulty in getting a woman to cook for him at a very small
wage. Wives were less companionable here than in most parts of the
world, since women and men took their meals apart; nor could Batûta
get his women-folk to break the custom of their country—a custom
which Varthema speaks of, nearly two centuries later, as obtaining in
South West India. Batûta had been appointed judge, and another thing
that troubled him was the irregular attendance of the lax Moslems
of his island at the mosque. He was very eager that such flagrant
non-observance of religious duty should be duly punished; and he urged
that the best way would be literally to whip the recalcitrants to
attend on public worship.

Now Batûta’s wives had powerful relatives. The sister of one of his
wives at Delhi was wife to the Emir of Mobar; to whom, therefore,
Batûta was doubly related. He had become a power in his island, and the
vizier grew jealous and suspicious. Might not the stranger conspire to
bring an army over from the coast of Coromandel? When Batûta saw what
was going on, he acted at once. “I divorced all my wives,” he says,
“save one, who had a young child, and I went on to other islands of
that great multitude of them.” From one of these, he shipped for Mobar;
but the wind changed, and he was driven to the coast of Ceylon and in
no small danger of drowning. The governor of the port came sailing
by, and refused a landing; for he was no friend to Moslem skippers.
Batûta won him over by telling him that he was on his way to visit
the Sovereign of Mobar, that he was related to him by marriage, and
that the whole cargo of the ship was intended as a present for that
potentate. The Ceylonese Râja of the district was on good terms with
his Moslem brother of Mobar, so Batûta was allowed to land. He found,
like Marco Polo, that Ceylon was divided among four kinglets. He of the
district soon sent for him, and gave him hospitality. He admired the
famous herds of elephants, the troups of chattering monkeys, the pool
of precious stones, and the luxuriant vegetation and glorious scenery
of Ceylon. He scaled that iron chain, which still exists, to reach the
top of Adam’s peak, and gives us the measure of the print of Adam’s
foot, on hard rock; for in Ceylon, as elsewhere, supernatural vestiges
are to be found. He visited Colombo and several other places in the
island, and then set sail for the coast of Coromandel.

But, while crossing the strait, “the wind blew strong, and the ship
was nearly swamped. Our skipper was a lubber. We were driven near
perilous rocks, and barely escaped going to pieces; and then we got
into shallow water. Our ship grated against the bottom, and we were
face to face with death. Those on board threw all that they had into
the sea, and bade farewell to one another. We cut down the mast and
cast it onto the sea, and the sailors made a raft. The beach was eight
miles off. I wanted to get down to the raft. I had two concubines and
two friends with me. These latter exclaimed: ‘would you get down and
leave us?’ I had more regard to their safety than to my own; so I
answered: ‘Get down, both of you, and the young girl whom I love with
you.’ My other young girl said: ‘I can swim. I will fix ropes to the
raft and swim alongside these people.’ My two comrades got down, one of
the young girls being with them; and the other swam. The sailors tied
ropes to the raft, and so helped her to swim. I gave them whatever of
value I had in the way of jewels, amber, and other goods. They got to
shore safe and sound, for the wind was in their favour. But I stayed
aboard the ship. The skipper got to shore on a plank. The sailors took
the building of four rafts in hand; but night came on before they had
finished, and the ship was filling. I got up on the poop, and remained
there until morning. Then several idolaters came to us in their barque.
And we got safe to land.”

His connexion, the Emir, received him warmly. This potentate was about
to attack a Hindu Power; and, while he was away on this expedition,
Batûta travelled about. He tells us that he came across a fakir with
long hair, who sat and ate in the society of seven foxes, and who
kept a “happy family”—a gazelle and a lion together. The Emir was
a ruthless tyrant, butchering women and children. Yet Batûta had no
scruple in proposing a scheme to him for the conquest of the Maldives,
where he had received so much kindness, and where he had left wives and
paramours. But pestilence came and swept away most of the inhabitants
of the district, including the Emir. The new ruler wanted to carry out
the scheme for occupying the Maldives; but Batûta got fever badly, and
very nearly died. When sufficiently recovered, he received permission
to recuperate his energies by taking the long voyage round Cape Comorin
to Honawar, where he wished to meet his old friend, Jamâl Oddîn,
again. But, from time immemorial, the sea had been a no-mans province,
infested by pirates; and the calling, continuous or accidental, of
sea-thief was then as honourable as it was ancient. His ship was
attacked by twelve Hindu craft, and taken after a severe battle. Batûta
was stripped of his jewels and all his belongings, and set on shore
with a pair of breeches on. He lost the notes of his travels with his
other belongings. Out of the way of direct business, the robbers could
be merciful, and there was no reason why they should take his life. He
made his painful way to Calicut, and put up at a mosque—always the
asylum of the indigent. Some of the lawyers and traders here had known
him at Delhi. They clothed, fed, and housed him. What was he to do? He
dared not return to Delhi. A son had been borne to him by a Maldive
wife. He had a desire to see the child. The vizier was dead; but the
queen had married again, and he wondered what sort of reception he
should get. Paternal tenderness prevailed: “I went there on account of
my little son; but when I had seen him, I left him with his mother,
out of kindness to her.” He was hospitably entertained, but stayed a
very few days. The new vizier furnished him with those provisions which
every traveller by sea must purchase for himself and carry with him in
the fourteenth century; and he set sail for Bengal, where he arrived
after 43 days at sea (A.D. 1341).




CHAPTER VIII

OFF TO MALAYSIA AND CATHAY


Batûta speaks of Bengal as the land of plenty. Everything was cheaper
there than anywhere else in the wide world. He picked up a very
beautiful slave-girl for a trifle. But the muggy climate made Bengal
“a hell full of good things.” The Sultan was in revolt against his
lord-paramount at Delhi; and as Batûta was a prudent person, held
Mohammed Tughlak in wholesome awe, and could not predict the issue of
the contest, he did not visit the Bengalese Court. He went up to the
hill-country, half-way to the Himalayan giants, instead; for he desired
to see an aged holy man who dwelt there, one who was reported to take
no food excepting a little milk, and that only every ten days, and to
sit upright all night. This old sheik was a seer, and foretold events
which should befall his guest and which he declares really happened.
Batûta was proud to be justly hailed as “the greatest traveller of all
the Arabs.” He returned from the hills to visit a city not far from
modern Dacca.

We next find him on the Indian Ocean, standing off the Nicobar
Islands, probably because his ship needed a fresh supply of water. The
inhabitants were fearful of strangers, would not allow any ship to sail
in front of their houses, had the fresh water required brought down to
the shore by elephants, and traded by signs; for nobody could speak
their language. The men went about naked, and the women wore a girdle
of leaves only. All were remarkable for the ugliness of their dog-like
faces. Batûta was told that a man might be the husband of 30 or more of
these beauties. Adultery was severely punished, the male offender being
hanged, unless he could find a friend or a slave willing to suffer
in his place; the woman being trampled to death and her body cast
into the sea. The king came down to the beach with an escort of his
relatives, all mounted on elephants. He wore a coloured silk turban and
a goat-skin tunic, with the hair turned outwards, and he bore a short
silver spear in his hand. The usual gifts were presented in dumb-show.
“These folk work magic on any ship that withholds presents; and it is
wrecked.”

Moslem traders called any part of the Malaysian Archipelago, Java; but
the port to which our traveller next came was really in Sumatra. The
Emir of the Mohammedan sovereign received the visitors with customary
Eastern munificence and gave them rich dresses. Our traveller speaks
highly of the Sultan as being a cultivated man who loved the society
of the learned and enjoyed discussion with them. A modern writer says
that the humblest man he ever knew was a duke, and Batûta might have
said the same of some rulers. The humility of the Sultan of Sumatra was
so great that he walked to prayers every Friday! Batûta took a long
journey inland, and tells us of frankincense, clove, nutmeg, mace,
and other products of Sumatra, and of how a man is sacrificed by the
natives at the foot of the camphor-tree to ensure its good bearing.

He was eager to reach China—that land of strange ways and peculiar
civilization in Farthest East. The complaisant Sultan gave him passage
in one of his own junks, provided him with stores for the voyage, and
ordered a guide-interpreter to attend on him. In three and a half
weeks, he came to a place which he calls Kakula, and which may have
been on the mainland. Here he was well received by the pagan king, and
chanced to be present at a curious proof of devotion to royalty. “One
day, a man made a long speech, not one word of which I understood. He
held a knife in his hand, which he grasped firmly, and cut off his
own head, and it fell to the ground.” This sounds incredible; but it
is a fact. The feat was done by means of apparatus. A sickleshaped
knife was attached to a stirrup. The suicide placed his foot in the
latter, gave it a sharp jerk, and the knife shore off his head. Our
traveller was told that the deed was done to make manifest the great
loyalty of the victim, and that his father and grandfather had made the
same praiseworthy exit from life in honour of the king’s father and
grandfather. Their families received compensation from the kings. A
similar case of self-execution was authentically recorded in the last
century.

The Eastern Ocean was so calm that the junk had to be towed by boats.
Marco Polo had the same experience in these seas. Batûta touched at
Kailiki, a port of Tawalisi, probably Tonquin; but no one is quite sure
where this land lay. Even the Sulu Islands have been suggested! The
king was as powerful as the Emperor of China. His people were idolaters
after the manner of the Turks, and Batûta reports a conversation with
his Amazonian daughter, introducing a few words of their language. This
princess could write, but not speak Arabic. Some discredit has been
thrown on this part of his narrative, mainly on the ground of language,
but also because what he has to say about her recalls very ancient
classical stories. But we must recollect that Batûta is relying on
his memory at a time when the events belonged to a far-distant past;
that his work was dictated; and that it was edited by the Secretary to
the Sultan of Fez. He confesses that he did not understand very well
what the princess said to him. And the language she spoke may have
struck him as like Turkish in sound, and hence is given in some sort of
imitation of that tongue. The more one studies ancient travellers and
pilgrims the more assured one becomes of their essential sincerity and
the general accuracy of their observation. We know very little indeed
about the Nomadic penetration of the Far East. That this princess
was able to write a little Arabic, would seem to show that there was
considerable Arab trade with Tawalisi.

This lady was governor of the port, a post which her father had given
her as the reward of her powers in battle. For, once, when her father’s
army was on the point of defeat, she routed the enemy, and brought back
the head of their leader. She commanded an army, whereof one regiment
was of women. Neighbouring princes had wished to marry her, but had
withdrawn their pretensions; for she insisted that first they should
overcome her in the lists; and they were afraid of the ignominy of
being vanquished by a woman. She was amazed at the wealth of India, and
said to Batûta: “I must conquer it for myself.”

Favourable winds and strenuous use of the oar brought the junk to
China. He found that he had to pass through a stringent customs-house;
and that a register was taken of all who left or arrived at a Chinese
port. The captain was held responsible for his crew and passengers,
and to this end an official list was essential. Should the traveller
elect to stay with some other trader, his host took care of his money
and goods, but was bound to return them at the close of the visit, with
a deduction for necessary expenditure. Any deficiency must be made
good. But the trader might, if he chose, put up at an inn. Batûta was
surprised to find paper-currency. He admired the big poultry; but not
the dirty cotton-clothes of the Chinese, nor their relish for the flesh
of dogs and swine. As in Hiuen-Tsiang’s time, they burned their dead.
A portrait of every traveller was taken without his knowing it, and
thus, should an evil-doer try to escape from justice from one province
to another, he was readily discovered. There were many Moslem traders
in China; most of these had settled there; and Jews had found a home in
China for eleven centuries.

Travelling in China was “safer and more agreeable than in any other
land on earth. Although it takes nine months to cross this country, one
need have no fear on the journey, even though one should have wealth in
one’s care. There is an official with troops, both horse and foot, at
each hostelry to keep matters in order. This official, accompanied by
his scribe, comes to the hostelry every evening; and the scribe writes
down the name of every guest, seals up the list, and locks the door.
They come again in the morning and go over the list and the inmates;
and a man goes with the travellers to the next hostelry and returns to
the officer with proof that they have arrived.... The traveller can buy
all he needs at these inns.”

Batûta visited the great port of Zaitun (Touen-chow), whence, among
other manufactures, “clothes of gold and _satyns_ riche of hewe”[10]
were shipped. Perhaps there was no port in the world with so big a
trade as Zaitun. Batûta thought so: “The harbour is one of the greatest
on the earth—I err—it is the greatest. There I have seen an hundred
junks of the biggest size at one time, and more smaller ones than could
be numbered.... Here, as in every Chinese city, every citizen has a
garden and a field, and his house stands in the middle of the land he
owns. For this reason, the cities of China are very much spread out.”
At Zaitun, he had the good fortune to meet, in the Moslem quarter, the
ambassador who had been sent to Delhi; and now great folk began to make
his acquaintance. Among his visitors was “one of the merchants to whom
I owed money when I ran into debt on my arrival in India, and who had
shown more breeding than the rest of my creditors.” The Head Mandarin
wrote to the Emperor to ask permission for the traveller to visit him
at his capital; and, while awaiting a reply, allowed him to travel by
water-way far inland from Canton, and provided him with an escort. At
Canton, he found temple-hospitals for widows and orphans, the blind,
crippled, and infirm.

He tells how the sailors stood up amidship to row, and the passengers
sat fore and aft. He visited one of those wonderful saints who claimed
incredible years. The holy man told him that he was one of the saints
whom he had visited in India. This man had the reputation of being able
to induce visions. Possibly he united the qualifications of skilled
hypnotist and skilled liar.

When our traveller returned to Canton he received permission to visit
the capital. He journeyed many days by land and along the Imperial
Canal. He speaks rapturously of the fertility and charm of the country
he passed through. Everywhere he was treated with the deepest respect.
But there was a drawback: everywhere Paganism was flourishing. He met
a fellow-believer, the brother of one of the seers of Egypt, a man
greatly esteemed by the Chinese, and later on one particular prophesy
was completely fulfilled, for he came across another brother, whom it
was also foretold he should meet, on the borders of Sahara.

While attending the court of the viceroy at Hang-chow, he was
eye-witness to a remarkable feat, of which he gives as circumstantial
an account as one would expect to get from a man of the fourteenth
century. “It was in the hot season, and we were in the courtyard
outside the palace. A juggler, a slave of the Khân, came in, and the
Emir commanded him to show some of his marvels. Thereupon the juggler
took a wooden bowl with several holes made in it, and through these
holes long thongs were passed. He laid hold of these thongs, and threw
the bowl up into the air. It went so high that we could no longer
see it. There was only a little of the end of the thong left in the
juggler’s hand. He ordered one of his boy helpers to lay hold of it and
mount. The boy climbed up the thong, and he also went out of sight.
The juggler called him three times; but no reply came; so he seemed
to get into a great rage, snatched up a knife, and laid hold of the
thong; and he also was no longer to be seen. After a time, down came
one of the boy’s hands, then a foot, than the other hand, then the
other foot, then the trunk, and, lastly, the head. And now, down came
the juggler, panting, and his clothes in a bloody state. He kissed the
ground in front of the Emir and said something to him in Chinese. The
Emir gave him some order, and he then took up the severed parts, laid
them together properly, gave a kick, and behold! the boy got up and was
before us again. I was so astounded that my heart beat violently, as it
did when the Sultan of India had a similar trick done before me. A drug
was given me, which set me right again. The Khazi Alfkaouddîn was next
to me. ‘By Allah!’ said he, ‘as for me I believe there has been neither
going up nor coming down, nor cutting to pieces, nor making the boy
whole again. It is nothing but trickery.’”

We must not forget that Batûta was more than inclined to superstition,
that he was very perturbed by what he saw, or thought he saw, that the
“magician” had boys with him, who probably assisted in this trick,
and that it is part of the conjurer’s art to divert the attention of
spectators while in the actual performance of his feats. And the event
was reduced to writing years after it was observed. Moreover, one of
the earlier investigations of the Society for Psychical Research shewed
that, on an occasion when a clever amateur conjurer, not known to be
such, invited highly educated and observant witnesses to a supposed
spiritualistic séance, and received their accounts of what they
believed themselves to have seen, written independently of each other
and immediately after the event, “not one of the detailed reports is
accurate throughout, and scarcely one of them is accurate in even all
the points of importance.”[11] But we have it on the authority of the
Professor of Chinese at Cambridge that P’u Sung-ling, the author of the
Liao Chai, relates having seen the complete trick, as Batûta describes
it, in the seventeenth century,[12] except that, in this case, the
boy came out of a box. These are, perhaps, the most remarkable of many
similar mystifications, some of them related by quite respectable
witnesses, from the 13th century down to our own time.[13]

He tells us of the excellent workmanship of Chinese artisans, and
how they worked in chains for a period of ten years. At the end of
that time, they were free to go about in China, but not to leave the
frontiers. At 50, they became absolutely free men, and were maintained
at the public cost, old age pensioners, in fact, in this early
fourteenth century. And the pension was not merely given to these
slave-workers, but to nearly all Chinese.

He admired the gay life on the canal, crowded with the boat-houses
of the people—a teeming happy population, dressed in bright colours,
and pelting one another in pure fun with oranges and lemons. Hang-chow
had within its great encircling wall six towns, each guarded by walls.
At Khaniku or Khanbalik (Pekin?) he was present at the obsequies of a
great dignitary, whom he believed to be the Tartar Emperor; but that
was not so, for the Emperor, who had ascended the throne 14 years
before Batûta’s arrival, reigned 21 years after his departure. But
he certainly was present at the funeral of some great Tartar; for
his account of the interment of the Tartar dignitaries of China is
confirmed by at least one other early traveller. He tells us of how the
dead man’s concubines and horses were buried with him, alive, in the
same grave. He relates, not very correctly, the ceremonies observed at
the court of the Emperor. Apparently his recollection becomes confused
with that of the court-usage at Delhi and Yemen. In any case, it is
possible that he only had an interview with some viceroy, concerning
whom he was misinformed or somehow mistook him for the supreme Khân.

A revolt against Tartar rule took place about this time, so Batûta
thought it prudent to leave China. He embarked on a junk which belonged
to the King of Sumatra, whom he had visited on his way out, and “whose
servants are Mohammedans.” On the voyage the junk laboured through
a terrific storm. The mirage of a big mountain was also seen. The
sailors took this for the fabled roc, with which the _Arabian Nights
Entertainment_ made our Childhood acquainted.

He remained in Sumatra three months, the guest of the monarch who had
before entertained him; and was fortunate in witnessing the nuptials
of the heir-apparent. First came dancers and merry minstrelsy; then
the bride, conducted from the apartments of the women by forty richly
adorned ladies, who carried her train. For this high occasion, they
had removed their veils. The bride went up on a platform; and the
bridegroom rode up, in all the pride of armour, of a stately elephant,
and of his own self-importance. One hundred youths of quality,
beardless like himself, attended him on horseback. They were clad in
white, their caps being a glitter of gold and jewels. Largess was
scattered among the crowd. The prince now went up to his father, kissed
his foot, and ascended the platform. Then the bride rose and kissed her
groom’s hand; he sat beside her, and he and she put betel and fawfel
into one another’s mouth. Then the covering of the platform was let
down, and the whole structure, with bride and bridegroom on it, was
carried into the palace. Finally, a feast was given to the crowd.

From Sumatra, Batûta voyaged in a junk to the Malabar coast of
Southern India, and thence sailed to Arabian Zafar (A.D. 1347), both
well-remembered places, coasted to Hormuz, wandered over the Two Iraks
(Persia and Mesopotamia) once again; made across Asia Minor to Tadmor
and as far north as Aleppo. At Damascus he got the first news of home
he had received during his wanderings; his father had lain fourteen
years in his quiet grave at Tangier. The Black Death was raging at
Damascus. It slew twenty-four hundred of the inhabitants in a single
day. So Batûta made his way to Egypt through Syria and Palestine, and
went on to Mecca by way of the Red Sea and Jidda. This was the fourth
of his pilgrimages. On his return to Cairo, he found the Black Death
wasting the population. Mocking, lethal, invisible, this awful plague
was rapidly sweeping westward and destroying whole families. Agnolo
da Tura of Siena tells us that he had to bury five of his sons in the
same grave with his own hands, and that his was no exceptional case.
Batûta left Cairo for Jerusalem and returned from Palestine to Egypt by
sea. He now felt a desire to see his native land again. He took ship to
Sardinia, and, wishing to see the island, let the vessel he had voyaged
in go to Tunis. He was lucky, for it was taken by Christians. He
managed to reach Tunis in another ship, and got to Fez overland on Nov.
8th, 1349; having been on his travels nearly a quarter of a century. He
presented himself before the Sultan, and was received as was befitting
so pious a pilgrim and distinguished a traveller.




CHAPTER IX

MOORS OF SPAIN AND NEGROES OF TIMBUKTU


But Batûta’s travels were by no means at an end. He made a filial
visit to the place where earth that “makes all sweet” had closed on
his father’s history. Once at Tangier, the temptation was strong to
cross the Straits and visit the shrinking Moslem dominion in Spain. He
landed where his compatriots had landed to conquer the Peninsula—at
Gibraltar (Jabal Tarik, the Hill of Victory). He saw a cousin by his
mother’s side, who had settled here; ran all over Moorish Andalusia,
visiting renowned cities that still remained in Mohammedan hands; and
came to lordly Grenada, where the Alhambra must have been nearing its
completion. He returned to Fez by way of Ceuta.

His energy was unabated; his thirst for travel unquenched; he could not
settle down. In February, 1352, he is off again; this time for Central
Africa. At Tafilelt, on the borders of Sahara, he meets another brother
of the Sheik at Alexandria; and so another prophecy is fulfilled. In
mid-Sahara, he finds an oasis with a “village on it where there is
nothing good. The mosque and the houses are built of blocks of salt and
are covered with camel hide. There is no tree, for the soil is pure
sand; but there are mines of salt.” He had dropped on those dwellings
of rock-salt of which Herodotus wrote seventeen hundred years before
him. But only the underlings of traders abode there; and dates and
camel’s flesh were their fare. Here was the salt-supply for the wild
tribes of Sahara. They cut the blocks of it into a certain shape and
used this as money. The caravan with which Batûta travelled suffered
severely here from the vileness of the water.

When Tashala was reached, the caravan rested three days to make ready
for a vast and solitary tract of desert “where there is no water, nor
is bird or tree to be seen, only sand and hills of sand, blown about by
the wind in such wise that not the smallest vestige of a track remains.
Wherefore, no one can travel without guides from among the traders;
but of these there are many. The sunlight there is blinding.... Evil
spirits have their will of that man who shall travel by himself. They
enchant him, so that he wanders wide of his path, and there he comes to
his end.”

A long journey across this great waste of sand brought the caravan to
another oasis, where pits had been dug to fill with water, and where
negroes took care of a store of goods out in the open. These negroes
did not show the deep respect due to the superior white race; but
Batûta had a fancy to learn all about them, so he stayed on, and put
up with their want of manners for two whole months. Traces, at least,
of polyandry were to be found here; for a sister’s son succeeded to
property, and everybody took the name of a maternal uncle. The women
were good looking, but, alas! they were far from shy; they did not even
wear a veil, notwithstanding their accompanying the men to the mosque.
Traders might take them for their wives; but must leave them behind on
their departure. Our zealous Moslem, experienced in matrimony as he was
and so excellent a judge of concubines—all of them sacred property
and his very own—was greatly shocked at yet another instance of the
freedom in manners of women and absence of jealousy in the husbands
among certain Mohammedan peoples. A man might have a woman visit him,
even with her husband there, and in the presence of his own wife; and
a man might go home to find one of his male friends sitting alone with
the wife of his bosom. But what would perturb an ordinary man causes
no flutter in this degenerate breast. “He quietly takes a seat apart
from them until the visitor goes away.” Batûta’s sense of delicacy was
much offended when, calling on a former host of his, who was a judge
moreover, he found that a handsome young woman had also made a call and
was still there. He upbraided his friend roundly, and the only reply he
got was that it was the custom of the country. This was too much: he
broke with the judge.

A long, difficult, but quite safe journey brought him and three
companions to Malli. Here he was seriously ill, and the sickness lasted
many weeks; “but Allah brought me back to health.” A few white people
dwelt at Malli, of whom the judge was his host. “‘Arise,’” said the
judge to him one day when the Sultan had given a feast, “‘the Sultan
hath sent thee a gift.’ I fully looked for a rich dress, some horses
and other valuable gifts; and lo! there were but three crusts of bread,
a piece of dried fish, and a dish of sour milk. I smiled at people
so simple and the value they gave to such rubbish.” Experience of
spendthrift Oriental Courts and the lavish munificence of princes in
other parts of the Mohammedan world had spoiled him for the simplicity
of Central Africa. He often saw the Sultan after this incident; but
sorely as his self-love was wounded by such a contrast to the honour
always paid to him hitherto, he held himself in until his fury reached
fever-heat and it became impossible to keep a bridle on his tongue any
longer. Then he rose to his feet: “I have travelled the world over,”
said he; “I have visited the rulers thereof; I have stayed four months
in thy dominions; but no gift, no suitable food has come to me from
thee. What shall I say about thee when men shall question me concerning
thee?” A horse and good provisions, and a supply of gold now came from
this “greedy and worthless man”; before whom the negroes presented
themselves in the worst of their beggarly garments, probably as a sign
of their humility; for they “crawled to his presence, beating the
ground with their elbows and throwing dust on their heads.” However the
“greedy and worthless” Sultan is allowed at least one small virtue: he
kept the land in order; the traveller there had no fear of robbers, and
if any one chanced to die, his property was handed over to his lawful
successors. And the people had a great virtue also; they were constant
in their attendance at the mosque; and if a son did not learn the whole
of the Koran by heart, his father kept him shut up until he had done
so. Yet, in spite of such praiseworthy piety, they let their little
daughters and slaves whether male or female, go about quite naked.
Batûta remarks that here cowries were used as coin. Travellers in the
Niger District during the third decade of the last century found that
many of the habits and customs described by Batûta still obtained there.

From Malli, our traveller journeyed on to the banks of the Niger,
and saw, with surprise, its great herds of hippopotami. He visited
Timbuktu, and believed he was journeying along the banks of the Nile;
a pardonable mistake; for the Niger takes a general direction towards
the North-East in this part of its course. He now returned to Fez by a
different and more easterly route (A.D. 1355).

He had traversed the entire Mohammedan world, and beyond it to wherever
a Mohammedan was to be found. He had visited several far-separated
places several times, and had obeyed the obligation to visit Mecca
oftener than the most zealous Moslem was wont to do. The Sultan
commanded that an account of his travels should be recorded. The
Sultan’s Secretary edited the work, and thought to embellish a plain
tale by overloading it with literary pinchbeck and by dragging in
irrevelant quotations from the poets. The last words of the work are:
“Here ends what I have put into form of the words of Sheik Ibn Abdulla
Mohammed, whom may Allah honour! There is no reader of intelligence but
must grant that this Sheik is the greatest traveller of our days; and
should any one dub him the greatest traveller of all Islam, it were no
lie.”[14]

Ibn Batûta was 51 at the end of his recorded journeyings. In spite of
the racket of thirty years, spent in unceasing travel, of shipwreck
and battle, of privation and fevers and much suffering of many kinds,
all of which he brushes lightly aside as matter of small moment, his
natural vigour remained such that he lived three years beyond the
allotted span. The “fitful fever” of his life ceased in the year 1377.




IV.—LUDOVICO VARTHEMA OF BOLOGNA,

RENEGADE PILGRIM TO MECCA. FOREMOST OF ITALIAN TRAVELLERS.




CHAPTER I. THE GREAT AGE OF THE RENAISSANCE AND OF DISCOVERY.


By the close of the Fifteenth Century, the relative stability of
society and of its convictions during the Middle Ages was undone.
The Italian, at least, had cast off the restraints of that rigid and
traditional world, and was in reaction against it. For, social bonds
were loosened, and the corporate life of guild and city was in decay.
With the revival of letters, society became imbued once again with
the Greek and Roman conception of man as a progressive creature, and
was awakened to the richness of thought and feeling to be enjoyed in
vigorous passionate life. Self-sufficiency, self-assertion, and force
of will were admired above all other qualities, and it was the ambition
of most men to achieve them. Each man strove to fulfil his own nature
in his own way. Religion rapidly degenerated into an indispensable
observance of formalities, a traditional habit, a customary cloak. The
rigorous men of the Renaissance sought to live fully, freely, and with
diversity; they thirsted for new and refreshing springs; they quaffed
delightful and refreshing draughts; they boldly winged their way to
unfamiliar spheres, or gratified sense and passion to the full. The
age was aglow with all manner of ideality. On the whole its passions
were unrestrained, save by prudence; unchecked by any moral curb, which
it had counted foolishness. The religious rapture of Savonarola was
an ephemeral phenomenon, and almost unique. Even in the gentle grace
of Perugino’s Madonnas and the sweet innocence with which he invests
the Child, we may mark the substitution of religious affectation
for religious sincerity. The age loved pomp and magnificence; and
these appear in the frescoes of Pinturicchio. It was a field for the
development of a deep-seated, incalculable, yet persuasive force of
Will: the spirit is portrayed in the subtle eye and inscrutable smile
of Monna Lisa.

It was when the Renaissance was in full flood, but before Ariosto,
“with his tongue in his cheek,” had achieved his cantoes of romantic
chivalry; before Raphael plied his brush with too perfect and serene
a finish; before Michael Angelo cast aside charm and beauty for the
expression of strength and power, that the energy of the age found a
new field for activity. The Turk swept the Ægean Sea and ruled the
Western Roman Empire. But the great drama of History unfolds tragic
irony surpassing the invention of poets. When the vast spaces of the
great Church of Justinian rang with the shout of the victors, the
knell of Moslem predominance sounded unheard. The Turk had captured
the gateways of the East only to force the European, in adventures
beyond the seas, to the domination of the world. Pioneers set out from
Portugal and Spain, and tried to cut out the Moslem middleman; they
steered to find a sea-way to the fabulous wealth of India. They coasted
along amazing lands, peopled by strange races, and entered novel and
unsuspected seas. Columbus found a new world beyond “wandering fields
of barren foam”; Vasco di Gama was forcing his way round Africa. Many
a narrow, ancient illusion was dispelled; and the minds of men were
excited to a rapture of expectation. The hearts of pious Portuguese and
Spaniards beat high at the hope of combining the salvation of heathen
souls with the profitable enslavement of heathen bodies. All men were
allured by the prospect of acquiring new markets, priceless gems, and
the gold dust of El Dorado. The modern world of aggressive commerce was
engendered in the very bosom of the High Renaissance.




CHAPTER II.—FROM VENICE TO DAMASCUS.


No commercial arithmetic called a certain Ludovico di Varthema to
adventure. Like Dante’s Ulysses, “nothing could quench his inward
burning to have full witness of the world.” “Ungifted,” so he tells
us, “with that far-casting wit for which the earth in not enough, and
which ranges through the loftiest regions of the firmament with careful
watch and survey; but possessed of slender parts merely,” he fixed his
mind on beholding with his own eyes some unknown part of the world and
on marking “where places are, what is curious in their peoples, their
different animals, and what fruit-bearing and scented trees grow there
... keeping before me that the thing which a single eye-witness may set
forth shall outweigh what ten may declare on hearsay.” It is as if a
cavalier of Boiardo or Ariosto had forsaken fairy land and sought novel
adventure in the kingdom of knowledge. Varthema set out to see and
know; and, although obviously a man of no great fortune, he would seem
to have neglected remarkable opportunities of trading and growing rich.

That he was a Bolognese, we learn from the title-page of his
volume—the _Itinerario_. As a citizen of Bologna, the Pope was his
overlord; and we find him calling himself, by a pardonable license,
a Roman. Whether eager curiosity was the only motive which impelled
him to travel, we know not. He lets drop in the middle of his volume
that he left a wife and children at home. Marriage in Italy was a
matter of family arrangement, with a view to the increase of family
wealth and power; and children could readily be left under the care
of kinsmen. “The Italians make little difference between children
and nephews or near kinsfolk,” wrote Bacon, “but, so they be of the
lump, they care not, though they pass not through their own body.”
And the family council has parental force in Italy, even to-day. The
unsettled condition of every Italian State in the days of that “Most
holy Lord the Pope Alexander Borgia,” his crafty, treacherous son,
and hardly less crafty and treacherous native statesmen and foreign
invaders, often made swift change of residence highly desirable. Of
that affectation of the men of the Renaissance—excessive and trumpeted
desire of fame, which was a mere imitation of the classics,—there
is not a trace in Varthema: he cared as little for bubbles as for
baubles. Whatever other motives may have incited him, lust of travel
was his predominant passion. What his occupation had been is unknown.
On an occasion when it was helpful to him to pose as a physician he
did so; and his close observation of the structure and habits of
animals and the qualities of plants, suggests the kind of educative
discipline which a physician would receive. But since he confesses to
having ordered a cold astringent preparation when a warm laxative was
required, his knowledge of physic was limited or readily forgotten.
Again, since, on one occasion, he takes military service as a Mameluke;
professes himself, on another occasion, to be an adept in the
manufacture of mortars; and we find him fighting with the intrepidity
and skill of a proved warrior against Arabs in India, he may very well
have been a soldier before setting out on his travels. In that age
of confusion, when the successes of the French in Lombardy broke the
balance of power among the Italian States, there was ample opportunity
of martial employment. There is not a trace of the accomplished
haunter of courts, no love of literature or of art apparent in the
_Itinerario_. Varthema’s birth, upbringing, and “the fate of his bones”
are secrets which lie securely hidden in the ruins of time. But his
narrative endures—an imperishable monument. It reveals him as a true
man of his period. His skill in dissembling, and his insensitiveness
at the call of expediency to any obligation of truth or gratitude,
contrast with his scrupulous pursuit of truth for its own sake and the
accuracy of his observation. His record of travel is one which displays
the coolness of his courage no less than its intrepid dash; it reveals
a man constant of purpose, and endowed with ingenuity, resourcefulness,
self-restraint, prudence, sagacity, and a sense of humour. Here indeed
is a rare man!

In the year 1502 there was peace in the Levant. Lucrative trade
between Venice and Egypt went on, unmolested by Turkish fleets. At
the close of that year, Varthema took sail for Alexandria; the wind
was favourable, and he reached the great port on one of the early
days of 1503. Alexandria was the chief mart for the interchange of
the wares of East and West, and therefore well known to Europeans;
“Wherefore,” says Varthema, “yearning after new things as a thirsty
man doth for fresh water, I entered the Nile and arrived at Cairo.”
“Babylon,” as Europeans called Cairo, was reputed to be one of the most
marvellous of cities; but our traveller was disappointed to find it
far smaller than he had thought. He declines to discuss the government
established there, or the arrogance of its Mameluke rulers; “for my
fellow-countrymen well wot of such matters.” Close upon two centuries
had passed since a Circassian slave clothed the Imam with a royal
robe, usurped his mundane powers, reduced him to a nonentity, founded
a dynasty, and ruled by military force from the Taurus and Euphrates
to the Nile. This dynasty delegated authority to Emirs and Sheiks. It
ruled by means of a soldiery, like itself, of slave origin, cruel,
insolent and unbending. Children of Christian descent, brought mainly
from the region which lies to the south of Caucasus, were instructed in
the faith of the Moslem and trained to physical endurance, boldness,
skill in warfare, and contempt of all men save their masters and
themselves. These Mamelukes, as they were called, received liberal
payment; they were allowed to keep a harem and to rear a family. The
land lay crushed and impotent beneath this military caste. Military
slaves, they exhibited the vices of slaves in office. As in the time
of Ibn Batûta, the Sultan of Cairo ruled; but now ruled over delegates
who were frequently rebellious to his authority; yet he and they and
all, even to the terrible ottoman Turk at Constantinople, who now held
Eastern Europe in bondage from the Danube to Cape Matapan, acknowledged
the headship of the Imam at Cairo as legitimate Caliph of the great
Abbaside line.

Leaving Cairo, Varthema took ship for Beyrout. Here, he saw nothing
noteworthy, save the ruins of an ancient palace, “which, _so they
say_,” was once the residence of the princess whom St. George rescued
from the dragon. We find a novel scepticism in this man of the new age.
“So they say,” is a phrase of frequent recurrence in the _Itinerario_.
The sceptic’s ears are as open as his brain is active; he repeats all
the information given to him, however extravagant and however healthy
his doubt; but he is careful to let the reader know that it is mere
hearsay; he gives a hint of his own disbelief, and leaves the matter
open to sane judgment: the piping times of a merchant in marvels have
passed away. When Varthema has his own ends to serve, we shall find
him telling a lie with as little scruple as any diplomatist of his
generation; but he records faithfully and exactly what he went out
to see and the incidents which befell him. We have the testimony of
the precise Burton that “all things well considered, Ludovico[15]
Bartema, for correctness of observation and readiness of wit, stands
in the foremost rank of oriental travellers”; and that great authority
writes thus although he only quotes from Richard Eden’s imperfect and
interpolated translation of a Latin deformation of the _Itinerario_;
and probably knew of no other copy.

Occasionally Varthema falls into a not uncommon blunder: he exaggerates
numbers; but he is always hard-headed, incredulous of tradition, and
not at all given to romancing.

A short voyage of two days brought our Italian from Beyrout to
Tripoli, whence he took the caravan-route to Hamath, a large city on
the Orontes, once an outpost of Judah, retaken by Israel in the wars
between the two kingdoms. At Menin, a land of luscious fruits and the
serviceable cotton-plant, he found a population of Christian-subjects
of the Emir of Damascus and two beautiful churches, “said to have been
built by Helena, mother of Constantine.” He went on to Aleppo, and
thence eight days of easy travel brought him to a city so ancient that
its foundation is lost in unfathomed time. He writes of Damascus that
“to set it forth is beyond my power.” Here he remained some months, in
order to learn Arabic—a task quite indispensable for farther travel in
Mohammedan lands. He tells us of the fortress, built by a Florentine
renegade, a man skilled in physic, who cured a Sultan suffering
from the effects of poison, and is venerated as a holy man. This
transformation of the physician into the saint may have suggested some
serviceable play-acting in India, of which we shall become spectators
later on.

The military Empire of Cairo was in decay, and had become very corrupt.
A vivid picture is set before us of delegated despotism and its
concomitants; greed, graft, outrage and squeeze. Whenever a new Sultan
succeeded to power, very large sums would be offered him for the rule
of such a wealthy city as Damascus. Of course the gold would have to
be wrung out of the resident merchants. If a good instalment of the
promised “present” were not speedily forthcoming, the Sultan would
find means to remove the dilatory Emir at the sword’s point, “or in
some other way; but, let him make the present aforesaid, and he shall
retain his rule.” “The traders of the city are not dealt with justly.
The rulers vie with each other in oppressing them, by robbery or by
dealing death.... The Moors are subject to the Mamelukes after the
fashion of the lamb to the wolf.... The Sultan will send two missives
to the governor of the citadel, one of which will command him to call
together there such lords or traders as he may choose. And when they
are gathered together in the citadel, the second letter is read to
them, whereof that which is its purpose, is gotten without delay.
Thus doth the lord aforesaid set about getting money.” We are told
of the curious way in which strict guard is enforced at the citadel:
throughout the night at intervals each sentinel signals to his next
neighbour by beating a drum; he who fails to pass on a responsive
rat-tat has to spend a twelvemonth in prison.

Varthema found the houses dirty outside—(they are still built of a
sort of cob), but the interiors splendid, with fountains and mosaics
and carvings and columns of marble and porphyry. He visited the Great
Mosque “where, so it is said,” the head of St. Zechariah is kept; and
was shown the exact spot where, “so it is given out,” Saul, breathing
out threatenings and slaughter, saw a great light and heard the voice
of Jesus; also the house “where (so they say) Cain slew Abel, his
brother.”

“But let us now return to the liberty which the Mamelukes aforesaid
enjoy in Damascus.... They go about in twos and threes, since it is
counted for dishonour to go alone. And, should they chance to meet two
or three ladies, license is granted to them, or they take it. They lie
in wait for these ladies in certain great hostelries, which are called
Khans; and, as ladies pass by the doorway each Mameluke will lay hold
of the hand of one of them, draw her inside, and abuse her. The lady
resists having her face seen; for women go about with face covered in
such wise that while they know us, we do not know who they are.... And
sometimes it chances that the Mamelukes, thinking to take some lord’s
daughter, take their own wives; a thing which happened whilst I was
there.... When Moor meeteth Mameluke, he must make obeisance and give
place, or he is bastinadoed, even should he be the chief merchant of
the city.”

We are told that rich Christian traders in every kind of merchandise
dwelt in Damascus, but were “ill-treated.” Long-eared goats were
brought up three flights of stairs to be milked for your meal. A
detailed description is given of the productions of the city and the
dress and customs of its people.




CHAPTER III

OVER THE DESERT TO MECCA


Now, the yearly caravan from Damascus to the Holy Cities of Arabia was
in preparation—a journey which the pious Moslem makes by rail to-day.
For, as has been truly remarked, “the unchanging East” is a venerable
catchword: the Orient moves on, but slowly. No “unbelieving dog” might
plant his foot on Arabian soil; no European Christian had ever seen
its sacred fanes. Here was a golden opportunity for one “longing for
novelty.” Varthema had learned to speak Arabic. That insinuating smile,
persuasive accent, and ingratiating address, so characteristically
Italian, were surely his, for we find that he never fails to secure the
firm friendship of utter strangers whenever he may require it—nay, he
exerts some exceptional fascination on all men, some dæmonic force, as
Goethe calls it. He says: “I formed a great friendship with the Captain
of the Mamelukes” who were to accompany and protect the caravan.
Doubtless, Varthema’s look and bearing were martial; and, as has been
said, he may have acquired experience in the Italian wars. To his
credentials he added the persuasive argument of a bribe. His new friend
accepted him as one of the escort. True, he must profess conversion
to the Mohammedan Faith. This was no great strain on the conscience
in days when Borgia and Julius della Rovere and the Medici sat in the
chair of St. Peter, and when most Christians contented themselves with
a half-sceptical observance of habitual forms. Like Henry of Navarre,
Varthema thought an apple off another tree than his own a matter
of small moment in the fulfilment of his purpose. He repeated the
necessary formula and became a Moslem. He had to take a new name. Might
it be because he was committed to an unparalleled adventure that he
took the name of the son of Amittei? He called himself Jonah.

This bold step was worthy of the Italian Renaissance, when a man had
thought it shame not to fashion his own life to his own ends; when he
might brush weak scruples aside, and overcome obstacles as the oar
turns the wave, converting hindrance into help. Behold our unflinching
traveller mounted on a spirited steed, armed to the teeth; ready to
encounter all chances of battle, desert-thirst, and unknown peril—one
fulfilling old Malory’s test: “he that is gentle will draw him unto
gentle tatches.”

The caravan, of pilgrims and merchants, women, children and slaves
(about 40,000 souls) and 30,000 camels, was guarded by only 60
Mamelukes, 20 being in the van, 20 midmost, and 20 bringing up the
rear. Damascus was left on April 8th 1503, and on the third day El
Mezarib was reached, a place on the high land east of the Jordan and
about 30 or 40 miles from it. Here the caravan rested 3 days to give
the merchants time to buy Arabian steeds. Doughty, that intrepid
English traveller and writer of unique English, tells us that, not many
years ago, El Mezarib remained the appointed place for gathering up the
pilgrim multitude. In Varthema’s time the sheik of the district was
both powerful and predatory. He is said to have owned 300,000 camels
(50 times the number accorded to Job in the day of recompense), 40,000
horses and 10,000 mares. The number may be exaggerated; but the sheik
was able to pounce down on the granaries of Egypt, Syria or Palestine
when he was least expected—even believed to be a hundred miles away.
“Truly, these folk do not run, but fly, swift as falcons; and they
keep close together like a flock of starlings,” Varthema tells us.
Their fleet spirited Arabian mares would run a whole day and night
without stopping, and be fresh again after a draught of camels’ milk.
He describes the marauding Arab very correctly as of dark complexion,
small make, effeminate voice, and with long, stiff, black hair.

From El Mezarib, the caravan pursued its ancient course through Syrian
and Arabian deserts; but more to the east than in later days. The
scheme of travel was to march for about 20 hours; then to halt at a
given signal and unload the camels; after resting for a day and night,
a signal was again given, and, in a trice all was made ready, and
cavalcade and “ships of the desert” were off again over rocky wastes
and pathless seas of sand. Then as now, camels were fed on balls of
barley-meal and watered every three days. Every eighth day, if no well
was found, the ground was dug deeply for water, and the caravan halted
a day or two. But it was invariably attacked by Bedouins when this
happened. It was their amiable custom to lie in wait for the caravan
and carry off women, children or any other unconsidered trifle which
might fall within their grasp. Unhappy Joseph Pitts of Exeter (who
was captured by Algerine pirates, professed Mohammedanism to escape
cruelty, and accompanied his third master on a pilgrimage to Mecca in
1680) describes how, between Mecca and Medina, “the skulking thievish
Arabs do much mischief to some of the Hagges (pilgrims to Meccah). For
in the night-time they steal upon them ... loose a camel before and
behind, and one of the thieves leads away the camel with the Hagge upon
his back asleep.” And, thirty years ago, Charles Montagu Doughty told
us how the Bedouin youth would emulate Spartan boyhood and strain every
power to rob a Hadji, for the glory of the feat.

There are many ruins to be found in Edom and Arabia Petrea. Like most
men of sceptical turn, Varthema tempered a spirit of free enquiry
with a little credulity. He saw distant rocks of red sandstone,
fantastically shaped; they were “like blood on red wax mingled with
soil.” He was told that these were the ruins of the cities of the
plain, and writes, probably from conviction, certainly with commendable
prudence, seeing that he had posed as an apostate: “Verily, Holy Writ
doth not lie, for one beholds how the cities perished by miracle of
God. Of a truth, I believe from the witness of my own eyes that these
men were evil; for all around the land is wholly dry and barren. The
earth may bear no single thing, and of water there is none ... and, by
a miracle the whole ruin is there to be seen even yet. That valley was
full twenty miles long; and thirty-three of our company died there from
thirst, and divers others, not being quite dead, were buried in the
sand, their faces being left uncovered.”

One day, when traversing what the Bible calls “the wilderness of Edom,”
“we came to a little mountain, and near to it was a cistern; whereat we
were well pleased and encamped on the said hill. The next day, early in
the morning, 24,000 Arabs rode up to us and demanded payment for their
water”—a time-honoured exaction of the Bedouin Arab, which in our
own days is said to have supported one third of Arabia.—“We refused,
saying that the water was the gift of God. Thereupon they opened battle
with us, saying that we had robbed them of their water. We set the
camels as a protecting rampart all round us and put the merchants in
the midst thereof and we stood siege during two nights and two days;
and a constant skirmish went on. By that time both we and our foes had
come to an end of our water. The mountain was wholly encompassed by
Arabs, and they averred that they would break through our defence. Our
leader, finding himself unable to hold on, took counsel with the Moslem
traders; and we gave the Arabs 1,200 ducats of gold. But, when they had
gotten the money, they said that not even 10,000 ducats of gold should
be satisfaction for their water; whereby we perceived what they sought
more than money. So our sagacious leader agreed with the caravan that
all men capable of battle should not mount on their camels, but look
to their arms. In the morning we put the whole caravan forward, and
we Mamelukes stayed behind. We made a strength of 300 fighting men;
and we had not to wait long for the fray. We lost but one man and one
woman, and we killed 600 of them.”

This statement evokes from a French author the ironic wit of his
race: he thinks that the two who were slain may be pitied for their
remarkably bad luck. Burton, who more than once accuses Varthema of
exaggerating numbers, thinks that his statement here may confirm
Strabo’s account of Ælius Gallus having lost two soldiers only in a
battle with 10,000 Arabs. We must not forget that the Arab’s body was
bare and wholly unprotected; he rode his steed bare-back, carried no
fire-arms, and his only weapons were lance and bow. He attacked in
dense formation. No wonder therefore that Arabs fell in masses as they
came on, and that the carnage was still more terrible when they fled,
helter-skelter “Come le rane innanzi alla nimica Biscia” as “frogs
before their enemy the snake.”[16] And the Mamelukes, few as they were,
rode saddled steeds, were disciplined, protected by armour, possessed
of fire-arms, and almost unerring of aim. Once Varthema saw one of the
Mamelukes perform a feat which recalls the legend of William Tell: At
a second attempt, he shot off from the bow a pomegranate poised on
the head of a slave at a distance of about twelve or fifteen paces.
And they were as expert horsemen as the Arabs. A Mameluke removed his
saddle, put it on his head and replaced it while at full gallop.

Thirty days were spent in absolute desert, and the caravan was always
attacked when it encamped by a water supply; but the only loss which
the foe caused during about six weeks of journeying was in the big
battle in which the man and woman were killed. A little later on and up
to our own time, the water-cisterns were defended by fortifications.
Leaving arid and rocky hills,

  “Boundless and bare
   The lone and level sands stretched far away.”

“Through these,” says Varthema, “we travelled five days and five nights.
Now you should understand all about it. It is a great level stretch of
white sand, fine as flour, and if by mischance the wind blow from the
south, all may be reckoned as dead; even with the wind in our favour
we could not see each other ten paces off. Wherefore there are wooden
boxes set on the camels, and in these the travellers sleep and eat. The
guides go on in front with compasses, even as if they were at sea. Many
died here from thirst; and very many, having dug for water and found
it, drank it until they burst; and here are mummies made.”

It is interesting to know that, up to 1908, when the railway for the
conveyance of pilgrims from Damascus to Mecca was completed, those
of the richer sort still used the wooden protection which our author
describes. Possibly the mummies of which he speaks were merely corpses
dried in the sun; but the preservation of the dead body by embalming
was a very ancient practice in these parts. Doughty found no actual
mummies in the Nabatean temples; but he collected and brought back,
from the funeral chambers at El Khreby, resinous matters of the same
character as those found in Egyptian sarcophagi. Presently, Varthema
shall see powders for the mummification of the dead sold outside the
Mosque at Mecca. Dried human flesh was an important part of the stock
in trade of an Arabian physician whom Burton came across. But faith
in the efficacy of pulverised mummy has been by no means confined to
Arabia. In the Seventeenth Century, Sir Thomas Browne, tells us in his
“Urn Burial” that: “Mummy is become merchandise, Miriam cures wounds
and Pharaoh is sold for Balsams”; and even within the last few years
Harry de Wint found the repulsive drug on sale as a cure for cancer at
Serajevo in Bosnia.

It so happened that the usual discomposing sounds, made by the
movements of unstable sand-hills, broke the silence of the desert just
where the Prophet had once stopped to pray. The superstitious Moslems
must have been wholly dismayed and demoralized, for even the iron nerve
of Varthema was strained; he tells us that he “passed on with great
danger, and never thought to escape.” At last, a thorn bush or two
broke the monotony of this “sea of sand,” and the travellers knew that
Medina was now only three days off. Even more pleasing than the sight
of vegetation to those pilgrims, who had “seen neither beast, bird,
reptile, no, nor insect, for fifteen days,” was the pair of turtledoves
that lodged in the branches of the thorn bush. And, most delightful of
all was the well of water which gave being to this miniature oasis. The
water-skins were refilled; and, so copious was the supply that sixteen
thousand camels were re-laden with the precious burden. Hard by, on a
mountain, dwelt a curious colony, who depended on the well for their
water. Varthema could see them in the far distance, “leaping about the
rocks like wild goats.” And one does not wonder at their excitement;
for the cistern would not fill up again until the rains should come.
Varthema learned that these people were Jews, who burned with hatred
of all Mohammedans, probably not without very just cause. “If they
catch a Moor, they flay him alive.” They had the shrill voice of a
woman, were swarthy, and went about naked. Probably their “nakedness”
really amounted to their wearing a simple loose robe or a loin-cloth
only. That they lived on goats’ flesh is not remarkable; for it is the
staple food of the Bedouin Arab. Probably they were of small stature;
but Varthema dwarfs then into comicality: he gives them but five or six
spans of height. But he only saw them from afar. That they were Jews is
no fable. In spite of the general expulsion of Jews from Arabia with
the first successes of Islam, the existence of a remnant of the Chosen
People in this district has been well authenticated by Arabian writers;
they were to be found there nearly three centuries after Varthema saw
them, and towards the close of the past century Doughty heard tradition
of them. By some accident Varthema, or more likely, his printer,
places them between Medina and Mecca; but he came across them before
he reached Medina. It is hard to account for their presence in this
isolated and desolate district; and many are the explanations which
have been offered, and varied are the legends which have grown up.
Badger thought “that their immigration occurred after the devastation
of Judea by the armies of Nebuchadnezzar, and that the colony was
enlarged by successive bands of refugees down to the destruction of
Jerusalem by Titus and the persecutions to which they were subjected
under the Emperor Hadrian.” Here is one of the many problems of History
which are “beyond conjecture and hopeful expectation.”

Two days after this event, the pilgrims came up to another cistern of
water; they were now only four miles from Medina. Everyone thoroughly
cleansed himself thereat from all the grime and sweat of the hot, dusty
desert, and put on fresh linen, in order that he might present himself
purified before the sepulchre of the Prophet on the morrow. All around,
the land “lay barren and under the curse of God”; but, two stones’ cast
from the city there was a grove of date-trees and a refreshing conduit.

Our traveller found Medina to be but a poor place of about 300 hearths.
Food was brought thither from Arabia Felix, Cairo and Ethiopia; first,
to a port on the Red Sea, and thence overland by caravan—a journey
which occupied four days. He found the inhabitants “scum”; a character
which all travellers of all ages agree in giving them, and which they
shared with the people of Rome and of all places whither pilgrims
and the folk of many nations were wont to congregate. The Sunnites
and Shiites there, the two great sects which divide the Moslem world
“kill each other like beasts anent their heresies.” And Varthema, the
pretended proselyte, suddenly remembers that he is writing for a
Christian world, and is careful to assure it of his own conviction that
“these (beliefs) are false—all of them.”

“One wished to see everything,” he says, so the pilgrims passed three
days at Medina, “Some guide took each pilgrim by the hand and led him
to the place where Mohammed was buried.” Varthema gives a description
of the Mosque, than which, says Burton, nothing could be more correct.
“It is surmounted,” writes the English traveller, “by a large gilt
crescent, springing from a series of globes. The glowing imagination of
the Moslems crown this gem of the building with a pillar of heavenly
light, which directs, from three days’ distance, the pilgrim’s
steps towards El Medinah.” Varthema avers that the marvellous light
had a real matter of fact basis, being due to a cunning deception.
Whether due to trickery, or to the suggestive efficacy of faith and
expectant attention, the miracle once had a rival in the more ancient
supernatural outburst, every Eastertide, of the holy fire at the altar
of the Holy Sepulchre in Jerusalem. Neither Varthema nor his friend
the Captain of the Mamelukes was a man easy to dupe, or given to the
conjuring up of visions. “At the third hour of the night,” we read,
“ten or twelve greybeards came to our camp, which was pitched two
stones’ throw from the gate, crying, some here, some there, ‘There
is no God but God! Mohammed is the Prophet of God! O Prophet! Do
obeisance to God! Do obeisance to the Prophet! We implore forgiveness
of sin.’ Our captain and we ran out at this clamour; for we thought the
Arabs were on us to rob the caravan. We demanded why they were crying
out; for they made the same sort of din which may be heard among us
Christians when a saint works a miracle.” (Varthema cannot conceal his
sceptical temper!) “These elders answered: ‘Do ye not see the splendour
coming forth from the tomb of the Prophet?’ Our Captain replied that,
for his part, he could see nothing, and asked us if anyone had seen
anything; but we all said, ‘No.’ Then one of the old men demanded: ‘Are
you slaves?’ Which is to say, Mamelukes. Our Captain replied, ‘Yes, we
are slaves.’ To which the old man responded: ‘O, sirs, it is not given
to you to see these heavenly things; for you are not yet well grounded
in the faith.’” Now, in the morning of the same day, the Captain had
offered the Sherîf of the Mosque 3,000 ducats to see the body of the
Prophet, telling him that he had neither father nor mother, brothers
nor sisters, wife nor children, and had come thither to save his soul.
Whereupon the Sherîf had fallen into a rage and demanded how he dared
desire to behold him for whom God made the heavens and the earth.
Since the body was entombed within closed-up, solid walls, such an
audacious request marks the sceptical irreverence and haughty insolence
of the Mameluke, even before one of the most sacred temples of Islam.
The Mamaluke had declared himself ready to pluck out his own unholy
eyes for love of the Prophet, if only he might see his body first.
The Sherîf, probably in order to silence him, then said that Mohammed
had been translated to Heaven by angels. So now, the Captain shouted
contemptuously to the reverend greybeard who had told him that it was
denied him to see the vision by reason of imperfect faith: ‘You fool!
Shall I give thee three thousand ducats? By God, I will not. You dog,
son a dog!’.... The Captain thought that enough; and said so; and,
turning round to his comrades, exclaimed: ‘See where I wanted to throw
away 3,000 seraphim!’ And he mulcted the Mosque by forbidding any of
his men to visit it again.

Varthema dispels the popular belief that Mohammed’s coffin was
suspended in mid-air by the attraction of a magnet. “I tell you
truth when I affirm that there is no coffin of iron or steel, or any
loadstone, or any loadstone mountain within four miles.”

The journey from Medina to Mecca was at this particular time beset
with more than usual difficulty and peril. The Hejaz was nominally
a vassaldom of Cairo; really, it was under the almost absolute rule
of its own despot; and we learn from Arabian Chroniclers that the
despotism was being fought for by rival brethren. Indeed, throughout
Eastern lands, war between sons for succession to the throne rendered
vacant by the death of a father was the rule. And, in the long run,
this bloody business usually ended in the success of the most capable
competitor; so that, however horrible, it did not work out badly;
for what can be more fatal to a weak, subservient people than an
incompetent ruler? “There was a very great war,” says Varthema, “one
brother being against another; four brethren contended for the lordship
of Mecca; so that we travelled for the space of ten days; and twice
on our way we fought with 50,000 Arabs.” Probably Varthema habitually
over-estimated numbers; but there is no doubt that he had cause for
alarm before he reached the second of the two sacred goals.

Our traveller descended one of the two passes cut through the hills
which girdle and defend Mecca, and found himself in a “very famous,
fair and well-peopled” city. The caravan from Cairo had arrived eight
days before. Joseph Pitts, the Exeter sailor, also tells us how the
“caravans do even jump all into Mecca together.” “Verily,” says
Varthema, “never did I see such a multitude gathered together in one
place as during the twenty days I stayed thereat.” He writes us at some
length, though not so minutely or correctly as Burckhardt, of the great
house of Allah and of the Ka’abah within it—a building which conserves
the form of the old heathen temple and which was a place of pilgrimage
for ages before Mohammed; but this he did not know. He speaks of the
sacred pigeons of the precincts; of the seven circuits made by the
pilgrims; of the sacred well Zemzem, in whose brackish waters the
Moslem cleanse themselves both spiritually and physically; for did not
Hagar quench the dying Ishmael’s thirst therewith? of the sacrifice of
sheep, and how the flesh was cooked over a fire made of camels’ dung;
of elaborate rituals; of the gift of what was superfluous in the feast
to the many famished poor among the pilgrims; of the ascent to Arafat,
where Gabriel taught Adam to erect an altar; and of that strange,
ancient relic of heathen times, the casting of stones at the devil.
But he says not one word of the “Black Stone” of the Ka’abah, once
the fetish of ancient Arabian worship, and kissed to-day by the Hadji
(pilgrim). We learn that Mecca, like Medina, was fed from Arabia Felix
and Africa. It was a mart as well as a place of pilgrimage.

Now for a marvel. In an enclosure of the Mosque were two unicorns! They
were presents from an Ethiopian monarch to the Sultan of Mecca as the
finest thing that could be found in the world ... the richest treasure
ever sent. “Now, I will tell you of their make,” writes our author;
“the elder is shaped like a colt of 30 months, and he has a horn on his
forehead of about 3 arm lengths. The other is like a colt of one year,
and his horn is the length of 3 hands. The colour is dark bay; the
head like a hart’s, but no long neck; a thin short mane hangs over one
side; the legs are slender and lean, like a goat’s; the foot, a little
cloven, long, and much like a goat’s, with some hair at the back of the
legs. Truly, this monster must be a very fierce and rare animal.”

Whatever our interpretation, this is no “traveller’s tale” of
Varthema’s making. His painstaking veracity, except in the “practical
politics” of life, has been confirmed a hundred times over. Later on
in his book, we come across a description of the structure and habits
of the elephant which is a triumph of sharp prose-vision and detailed
matter of fact. One cannot doubt that he saw a beast at Mecca which
resembled, not remotely, the Unicorn supporter of our Royal Coat of
Arms. It is remarkable that Pliny describes a similar animal, and
that Ctesias, Aristotle and Strabo speak of the Unicorn. The name
occurs nine times in the Bible; but it is commonly supposed to refer
to the Rhinoceros. Varthema’s strange beast was a very different
animal, apparently resembling the horse-like creature with a solitary
central horn which Niebuhr found repeatedly sculptured on the ruins
of Persepolis. Similar beasts have been reported from Abyssinia and
Cape Colony; and at one time the unicorn was believed in India to
inhabit that refuge of the rare, inaccessible Thibet. Yet a generation
that is still with us regarded the gorillas and pygmy men of Hanno as
Carthaginian fables, until Du Chaillu brought back carcasses of the one
and Stanley gave authentic word of the other. But scientists leave us
no hope that some happy traveller shall come across a unicorn dead or
alive. For the stumpy protuberance of the rhinoceros is an epidermal
tissue, and the true bony horns of the deer tribe are developments
which grow from, or correspond to, two frontal bones; and it would
be impossible for a bony outgrowth to proceed from the mesian line.
Varthema’s statement must be deemed by all who know anything of
comparative anatomy to be incorrect. The great Owen thought that one
of the two horns of the animal must have been broken off or remained
undeveloped. Mr. Dollman, of South Kensington Museum, whose opinion
the author sought through the kind agency of Mr. S. le Marchant Moore,
thinks the creature was an onyx, with one of its horns suppressed and
both gentlemen suggest “that Varthema saw the creature in profile, and
having ascertained as well as he could under the circumstances, the
existence of one horn, did not trouble himself much further about it:
possibly the horn might have become more or less incurved.” We must
leave the question there, until someone shall give us ocular evidence
that Varthema made not the slightest blunder: truly _his_ “horn shall
be exalted!”

Varthema had now been signally successful in gratifying the passion to
penetrate unknown and mysterious regions which Spanish and Portuguese
discovery had aroused in him. So far as is known, he was the first
European Christian to reach the holy cities of Arabia; and since his
day no traveller ventured on the long and perilous route which he took.
At least six Europeans managed to visit Mecca in the last century; but
they all took the short route from the Red Sea.




CHAPTER IV.

THE ESCAPE FROM THE CARAVAN


And now, in the spirit of Alexander sighing for new worlds to conquer,
he looked forward with dismay to the return-journey of the caravan. A
perilous surprise awaited him which, with wonted adroitness, he turned
to his purpose. “Having charge from my Captain to buy certain things,
a Moor looked me in the face, knew me and asked me ‘Where are you
from?’ I answered: ‘I am a Moslem.’ His reply was: ‘You lie.’ ‘By the
head of the Prophet,’ I said, ‘I am a Moslem’; whereto he answered:
‘Come to my house’; and I followed him thither. Then he spake to me in
Italian, telling me whence I had come that he knew me to be no Moslem;
and that he had been in Genoa and Venice; whereof he gave me proof.
When I understood this, I told him that I was a Roman, and had become a
Mameluke at Cairo (!) Whereat he rejoiced greatly, and treated me with
much honour.” Varthema now began to ask questions of his host; craftily
affecting ignorance of recent events and pretending to be very hostile
to Christians and greatly indignant at hearing of the appearance of the
Portuguese in Eastern Seas. “At this, he showed me yet greater honour,
and told me everything, point by point. So, when I was well instructed,
I said to him: ‘O friend, I beseech you in the name of the Prophet to
tell me of some way to escape from the Caravan; for I would go to those
who are the Christians’ bitterest foes. Take my word that, if they
knew what I can do, they would search me out, even as far as Mecca.’
Then he: ‘By the faith of our Prophet, tell me, what can you do?’ I
replied that I was the most skilful artificer in large mortars in the
world. Hearing this, he exclaimed: ‘Mohammed be praised for ever, who
has sent such an one to the Moslem and God.’” Whereupon, a bargain was
struck. The Moor was ready to hide Varthema in his house, if Varthema
could induce the Captain of the Caravan to pass fifteen camels, laden
with spices, duty free. Varthema was so confident of having thoroughly
ingratiated himself with the Captain that he was ready to negotiate for
the free passage of a hundred camels, if the Moor owned so many. “And,
when he heard this, he was greatly pleased,” and gave full information
as to how to get to India. There was no difficulty about bribing the
Captain; and the day before the departure of the caravan, Varthema
stole to the Moor’s house and lay there in concealment.

Next morning, two hours before daybreak, bands of men, as was the
usage, went through the city, sounding trumpets and other instruments,
and proclaiming death to all Mamelukes who should not mount for the
journey to Syria. “At this,” says Varthema, “my breast was mightily
troubled, and I pleaded with tears to the merchant’s wife, and I
besought God to save me.” Soon he had the relief of knowing that
the caravan was gone, and the Moorish merchant with it. He had left
instructions with his wife to send Varthema on to Jidda, on the Red
Sea, with the caravan returning to India. It was to start later than
the Syrian caravan. Varthema was a man of winning ways, and he found
no difficulty in fascinating man or woman. He was far from being as
vain as, say, Lord Herbert of Cherbury, but, like that ingenuous
gentleman, he does not neglect to inform us when he has pleased the
fair. “I cannot tell how much kindness I received from this lady, and,
in particular, from her niece of fifteen years. They promised to make
me rich if I would stay on. But I declined their offer by reason of the
pressing peril. I set out at noontide of the following day, with the
caravan, to the no small sorrow of these ladies, who made much lament.”

In due time the caravan arrived at Jidda, which was then a very
important mart and harbour. Varthema immediately made for a mosque,
with thousands of indigent pilgrims, and stayed there a whole fortnight.

“All day long, I lay on the ground, covered up in my garments, and
groaning as if I suffered great pain in my bowels and body. The
merchants would ask: ‘Who is that, groaning so?’ Whereto the poor
people about me would reply: ‘He is a poor Moslem who is dying.’ But
when night came I would leave the mosque to buy food. Judge of what my
appetite became when I could only get food (and that bad) once a day.”

When the caravan had left the port, he contrived to see the master of
a ship bound for Persia who agreed to take him as a passenger; and on
the seventeenth day of hiding at Jidda, the ship put forth on the Red
Sea. To a true Moslem, the whole Eastern world as far as China was
barely more perilous than the Mediterranean was to a Christian. Those
were days when the seas teemed with pirates; but, on land, property
was better safeguarded by the despotic rulers of Asia than it was in
Europe. But the line between Eastern and Western traffic was rigidly
drawn at certain marts of exchange. Such were Aleppo and Beyrout for
commodities forwarded by way of the Persian Gulf; and still more
important were Cairo and Alexandria, the marts of Mediterranean and Red
Sea commerce. The Eastern trade was mainly in the hands of Arabs; but
it was pursued by certain Greeks, Albanians and Circassians also, who,
or their forefathers, had renounced Christianity for gain; and these
were not few. Jidda and other ports of the Red Sea, as well as those of
Somaliland, were crowded with ships, great and small, bearing spices,
drugs, dyes and other Eastern goods for the markets of Western Asia and
Europe. The Arabian coast of the Red Sea was hugged, and often, for
days together, no progress could be made at night; for the multitude
of rocks and sunken reefs rendered navigation perilous enough, even by
day, and a look-out was always kept at the mast-head.

Varthema’s ship visited and made some stay at several ports which are
now decayed. At one place, “coming in sight of dwellings on the shore,
fourteen of us landed to buy victuals. But they were the folk called
Bedouin; there was more than a hundred of them to our fourteen; and
they greeted us with slings and stones. We fought for about an hour;
and then they fled, leaving twenty-four of their number lying slain
on the ground; for they were unclad, and the sling was their only
weapon. We took all we could find, that is to say fowls, calves, oxen
and other things for eating. But, in two or three hours time, the
turmoil increased, and so did the natives of the land—to more than six
hundred, in fact—and we were compelled to draw back to our ships.”




CHAPTER V. CERTAIN ADVENTURES IN ARABIA THE HAPPY.


On arriving at Aden; which was a place of call for every ship trading
with India, Persia, and Ethiopia, custom-house officers at once came on
board the ship, ascertained whence and when it had sailed, the nature
of its freight, and how many were on board. Then the masts, sails,
rudders and anchors were removed to ensure the payment of dues. On the
second day after Varthema’s arrival, a passenger or sailor on board
called him a “Christian dog, son of a dog,” the usual polished address
of the proud Moslem to one who, albeit a co-believer, had not the good
fortune to be born in the faith. This exclamation aroused a suspicion
that he was a spy; for, a year before, Portuguese had appeared for the
first time in the Arabian Sea, had captured certain vessels, and killed
many of their crews. He was seized at once and violently carried off
to the deputy of the Sultan of Yemen. Now this Sultan was an unusually
merciful man, who rarely (Varthema says never) put anyone to death; so
he was merely clapped into gaol, and his legs fettered with eighteen
pounds weight of iron. On the third day of imprisonment, some Moslem
sailors who had escaped in the warfare with the Portuguese, attacked
the prison with the intention of slaying him; and the inhabitants
were divided as to what they should do. The Emir’s deputy decided
to spare the prisoners (another suspected person would seem to have
been incarcerated with Varthema); and they languished sixty-five days
in gaol. Then a message came from the Sultan, demanding that they
should be brought before himself. So, instead of voyaging to Persia,
Varthema, still in irons, was put on a camel and taken an eight days’
journey inland to Radâä. Ibn Abd-el Wahâb, Sultan of Yemen, was busy
marshalling a large army. In it, were three thousand horsemen, born of
Christian parents, but sold, while still children, by “Prester John,”
as the Portuguese called the King of Abyssinia. These slaves formed the
bodyguard of the Sultan. At this moment the rule of Yemen was disputed
among petty despots, and the Sultan was bent on reducing the turbulent,
rebellious tribes to his sole sway.

Varthema is brought in to the Sultan’s presence; his life hangs on
a hair; it is as if the sharp edge of the scimitar were already at
his neck; yet he does not lose his presence of mind. “I am of the
country of Rûm, my lord,” he began; and he began with a “parliamentary
expression” for, to an Arab, Rûm meant Asia Minor, recently the
possession of _New_ Rome, _i.e._, of the Byzantine Empire. “I became a
Mohammedan at Cairo (another trifling inexactitude). I came to Medina
of the Prophet, to Mecca, and then to your country. Everyone says, sir,
that you are a sheik” (a Mohammedan priest). “Sir, I am your slave.
Sir, do you not know that I am a Moslem?” The Sultan called upon him
to repeat the formula: “‘There is no God but the God: Mohammed is the
Prophet of God.’ But, whether it was the will of God, or by reason of
fear which gat hold of me, I could not pronounce these words.” Our hero
was indeed lucky, for the merciful Sultan only ordered him to be taken
to prison and kept there under strict guard while he should be away.
For he was about to attack Sanäa, the ancient capital of Yemen. And so,
“they guarded me for three months, supplying me with a loaf of millet
each morning, and another in the evening; yet six such loaves had not
satisfied my hunger for a single day; nevertheless, if I might have had
my fill of water, I had thought myself happy.”

In the East, the body of an insane person is believed to be occupied
by some spirit; and mad folk are therefore treated as irresponsible.
Varthema knew this, and he, two fellow-prisoners, one of whom he twice
speaks of as “my companion,” and yet another, “a Moor,” arranged
that one of the number should pretend to be mad in order to help the
others. The trick is time-honoured in the East; thereby David escaped
the hands of Achish, King of Gath. Lots were cast, and the lot fell
to Varthema. We can see him, like the Israelite King, “changing his
behaviour, scrabbling at the doors of the gate, and letting the spittle
fall down upon his beard”; he was allowed to go out, crowds of children
following him and shying stones at him. In self-defence he had to store
up a plentiful supply of like missiles in his garment and give a sharp
return. “Truly,” says he, “I never was so tired with labour and worn
out as during the first three days of my feigning.”

Now, the prison adjoined the palace; and there remained in the palace
one of the Sultan’s three wives with her “twelve or thirteen very
comely maidens, rather more than inclining to black. This queen” (so
Varthema dubs her) “was very tender-hearted to me. She was for ever
at her lattice with her damsels, staying there throughout the day to
see me and to talk with me; and I, while many men and merchants were
jeering at me, went naked before the queen; for she took very great
pleasure in seeing me. I might not go from her sight; and she gave me
right good food to eat; so that I gained my point.”

One of the most striking characteristics of the men of the Renaissance
is the combination of great intellectual power and lofty enthusiasm
with mediæval brutality. Now, the Sultana, in whose veins the warm
blood of the East flowed freely, suffered from the dull monotony of the
harem. She wanted excitement. She suggested to the supposed madman that
he should slay and spare not; for the fault would not be imputed to
him. He took the hint at once. He called on a fat sheep to declare its
religion, repeating the very words which the Sultan had addressed to
him: “Prove yourself a Moslem.” “The patient beast making no reply, I
took a staff and broke its legs. The queen looked on laughing, and fed
me with the flesh thereof during three days; nor do I remember to have
eaten better. Three days later, I killed an ass, which was bringing
water to the palace, in the same way; because that he would not become
a Moslem. And, in like manner, I cudgelled a Jew, so that I left him
for dead.” One of the gaolers, whom he declares to have been more mad
than he, called him “Christian dog, son of a dog.” This was enough: a
fierce battle by lapidation began—Varthema alone, on the one side; the
gaoler and children on the other. Varthema allowed himself to be badly
hit by two stones, “which I could have avoided easily; but I wanted to
give colour to my madness. So I went back to my prison, and blocked
the door up with large stones, and there I lived for the space of two
days without meat or drink. The queen and others thought I might be
dead, and caused the door to be broken open. Then these dogs brought
me pieces of marble saying, ‘eat; this is sugar;’ and others gave me
grapes filled with earth, and called it salt; but I ate the marble and
grapes and everything, all mixed up.”

It was an enlightened custom in Mohammedan countries to examine into
the mental condition of insane people at regular intervals. Rabbi
Benjamin, of Tudela, the Spanish Jew, tells us that, in the sixth
decade of the Twelfth Century, he found Commissioners in lunacy at
Baghdad; although he also speaks of that barbarous practice of chaining
the madman which obtained in England until some centuries later. Two
Mohammedan Ascetics, who dwelt in the mountains as hermits, were
brought to the prison to determine whether Varthema might be a person
bereft of mere mundane reason through his exceptional sanctity, or
only ordinarily mad. The hermits took opposite views on this knotty
question, and spent an hour in violently contradicting one another.
The prisoner lost all patience and, anxious to be quit of them, put a
stop to the discussion by the simple device which Gulliver employed to
extinguish the conflagration at Lilliput. “Whereupon,” says he, “they
ran off crying ‘he is mad; he is no saint.’ The queen and her maidens
saw all this, for they were looking on from their casement, and burst
into laughter, vowing that ‘by God, by the head of the Prophet, there
is no one in the world like this man.’”

Next day Varthema followed this up by laying hold of the gaoler by
those two horns or tufts of hair which were then, as now, fashionable
in Arabia, kneeling on his stomach, and so belabouring him that
he “left him for dead,” like the Jew. The queen was again vastly
entertained, and called out: “Kill those beasts.”

But it was discovered that, all this time, Varthema’s fellow-prisoners
had been digging a hole through the prison wall, and, moreover, had
contrived to get free from their shackles. The Sultan’s deputy was
fully aware of the favour with which the Sultana regarded Varthema; and
the lady knew him to be ready to carry out her commands. She ordered
the prisoner to be kept in irons, but to be removed into a doorless
lower chamber of the palace, and to be provided with a good bed, good
food and perfumed baths. For, as the reader will guess, she had fallen
in love with the captive. Sexual love among Arabians is anything but
a refined or spiritual passion; and the harem has not been found
precisely a temple of chastity anywhere,—mainly, perhaps, because
it is a harem. And this lady possessed a temperament as sanguine
and scandalous as any Messalina or Faustina or Empress of all the
Russias. Alas! Fate doomed her to bloom unseen in Arabia, and waste her
sweetness on its desert air. At the end of a few days, she started by
bringing Varthema some dainty dish in the dead of night. He tells us
how, “coming into my chamber, she called ‘Jonah! Come. Are you hungry?’
‘Yes, by Allah!’ I replied; and I rose to my feet and went to her in my
shirt. And she said: ‘No, no, not with your shirt on.’ I answered: ‘O
Lady, I am not mad now’; whereto she: ‘By Allah, I know you never were
mad. In the world there is no man like you.’ So, to please her, I took
off my shirt, holding it before me for the sake of decency; and thus
did she keep me for a space of two hours, gazing at me as if I had been
a nymph, and making her plaint to God in this wise: ‘O Allah! Thou hast
made this man white as the sun. Me, Thou hast made black. O Allah! O
Prophet! my husband is black; my son is black; this man is white. Would
that this man might become my husband! And while speaking thus, she
wept and sighed continuously, and kept passing her hands over me all
the time, and promising that she would make the Sultan remove my irons
when he returned.’

“Next night the queen came with two of her damsels, and said, ‘Come
hither, Jonah.’ I replied that I would come. ‘Would you like me to come
and stay a little while with you,’ she asked. I answered, ‘no, lady. I
am in chains; and that is enough.’ Then she said, ‘Have no fear. I take
it all on my own head. If you do not want me, I will call Gazelle, or
Tajiah, or Gulzerana to come instead.’ She spoke thus because she was
working to come herself. But I never gave way; for I had thought it all
out.”

Varthema had no desire to remain in Yemen, even should he mount its
throne,—a far less likely event than discovery and a horrible death.
“I did not wish to lose both my soul and my body,” he writes. “I wept
all night, commending myself to God.”

“Three days after this the Sultan returned, and straightway the queen
sent to tell me that, if I would stay with her, she would make me rich.”

Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof. Varthema is the man to
mould circumstances to his will: no web, however cunningly woven shall
hold him prisoner; his keen wit is ready to comply with the Sultana’s
request, if she will have his fetters struck off.

The lady fell into the trap. She manifests the clever, feminine guile
of the harem in her dealings with Ibn Abd-el-Wahâb, but she is no match
for Varthema. The Sultan is a strong man and a mighty man of valour;
but he is uxorious, and as wax in her hands. She ordered the prisoner
to be brought at once before the Sultan and herself. Ibn Abd-el-Wahâb,
good easy man, asked Varthema whither he desired to go if he should
choose to release him. The mendacious Italian replied: “‘O Lord, I
have neither father nor mother; wife nor child; brother nor sister;
only Allah, the Prophet, and you. You give me food, and I am your
slave.’ And I wept without ceasing.” Then the artful Sultana reminded
the Sultan that he would have to account to God, of whose anger he
should beware, for having kept an innocent man so long time in prison.
Abd-el-Wahâb proved as unsuspicious and benevolent as history declares
him to have been; yet he was as firm and able as a ruler as he was bold
and experienced in arms. His Sultana knew how to play on his merits
and convert them into defects. He at once granted Varthema liberty to
go whithersoever he chose. “And, immediately, he had my irons struck
off; and I knelt before him; and kissed his feet and the hands of the
queen. She took me by the hand, saying: ‘Come with me, poor wight, for
I know thou art dying of hunger.’ When I was with her in her chamber,
she kissed me more than a hundred times; and then she gave me excellent
food. But I had seen her speak privily to the Sultan, and I thought
she had begged me from him for a slave. Wherefore, I said: ‘I will
not eat, unless you promise me my freedom.’ She replied: ‘Be silent,
madman. You know not what Allah will bestow. If you are good, you shall
be an Emir.’ Now, I knew what kind of lordship she desired to bestow
on me; so I answered that she should let me get into fitter condition;
for fear filled me with other than amorous thoughts. She replied: ‘By
Allah, you say well. I will give you eggs, fowls, pigeons, pepper,
cinnamon, cloves and cocoa-nuts every day.’[17] So, at these good words
and promises, I plucked up heart a bit. To restore me to health, I
stayed fifteen or twenty days in the palace. One day, she sent for me
and asked if I would go a-hunting with her; which offer I refused not;
and, at our return, feigned me to fall sick by reason of weakness; and
so continued for the space of eight days; during which time she was
unceasing in sending persons to visit me. One day, I sent to tell her
that I had vowed to God and Mohammed to visit a holy man at Aden, who
was reputed to work miracles.”

We may not count meanness among the _petits défauts_ of this lady of
spacious passions. She was “well pleased” with Varthema’s suggestion,
and provided him with a camel and twenty-five golden ducats—a sum
which would go a long way in Arabia. We shall see presently to what use
he applied it. Eight days’ journeying brought him to the holy man of
Aden; and the second day after his arrival, he professed that he was
cured. He wrote to the Sultana that, since Allah had been so merciful,
he wished to see the whole of her kingdom. “This I did because the
fleet which was there could not set sail again for a month. I spoke
with a skipper in secret, and told him I wished to go to India, and
would give him a handsome present if he would take me. He replied that
he wished to touch at Persia first.” Nothing better could have fallen
in with Varthema’s wishes. Meanwhile he would explore Arabia Felix.

So, having adroitly contrived to reject the love of the Light of the
Harem without exciting her fury, and even coming by her purse, he turns
the opportune gift to account, and fills up the month of waiting by
a zig-zag camel-ride through Southern Yemen—the first and boldest
European traveller in the district, and the one who has penetrated
it must thoroughly. With the intention of doing this in his mind, he
ends his chapters on “How the women of Arabia Felix are partial to
White Men,” and on “The liberality of the Queen.”

His record of Southern Yemen bears witness to a shrewd observant eye
and a tenacious memory. Probably he travelled mostly with caravans.
He gives an account of the natural features of the land, its curious
domesticated animals, its wild beasts, its vegetable productions, its
trade, the colour, manners and dress of its strange natives—all borne
out by a variety of independent testimony. He visited many cities.
One, he found barbarous and poor; another, renowned for its attar of
roses. Several of these towns were flourishing centres of trade. He
even got to Sanäa, the walls whereof were so wide that “eight horses
might go abreast on the top of them.” Apparently Abd-el-Wahâb had
not yet conquered the petty chieftain, El Mansûr, who reigned there;
so Varthema found himself in the domain of the Sultan’s bitter foe.
We hear that rumour gave this ruler a mad son who would bite, and
slay, and then feed on his human victims. Varthema again tells us of
other madmen, Shiites and Sunnites, the rival sects of the Mohammedan
world, who kill each other like dogs for Religion’s sake. At Yerim,
he talked with many who asserted that they had reached their hundred
and twenty-fifth year; but, since there was no registration of birth,
we may venture to entertain our doubts. He tells us how it was the
fashion throughout Arabia to twist the hair into horns, and how the
women wore loose trousers. He came to El-Makrana, where “the Sultan
keeps more gold than a hundred camels might bear; and I say this
because I have seen it.” What became of that mighty bulk of gold? The
Arabian chroniclers tell us the firm, merciful and increasing rule of
Abd-el-Wahâb in Yemen had a tragic end: Turkish invaders captured him
and put him to death, not in the heat of warfare, but in cold blood.

Varthema “ran some risk from the multitude of apes” (of which Niebuhr
also speaks), and from “animals like lions (hyenas?). We passed on in
very great danger from the said animals, and with no little hunting of
them. However, we killed very many with bows and slings and dogs; and
thereby passed in safety.”

On reaching Aden he repeated the trick which had proved so successful
at Jidda. “I took shelter in a mosque,” he says, “feigning to be sick,
and there I lurked all day long; but, at night, I went forth to find
the skipper of the ship; and he smuggled me aboard.”




CHAPTER VI. EASTWARD HO!


For six days the wind was favourable; but it was now December of the
year 1503; and on the seventh day out, the North Eastern monsoon drove
the vessel back “with 25 others, laden with madder for the dyeing of
clothes. By dint of very great labour, we made the port of Zeila” (on
the African Coast, opposite to Aden); “and tarried there five days both
to see it and to wait for better weather.” Zeila was a great place
for traffic in gold and ivory, the law was well administered; but the
cruel slave-trade prevailed there then as, in a different form, it did
up to our own times. The Christian dominions of Abyssinian “Prester
John” were raided by Arabs; his subjects captured; and sold in Egypt,
Arabia, Persia and India. The merchants here would seem to have found
a profitable trade in beasts left with but a single horn; for Varthema
saw some, which, however, were quite different from those wonderful
unicorns at Mecca. He gives a faithful description of the black and
white Berbera sheep of Zeila.

The weather having improved, the ship touched at Berbera, and then
sailed up the Gulf of Aden and across the Arabian Sea. Twelve days saw
her at Diu, an island to the south of the Indian Peninsula of Kathiawar
and subject to the Sultan of Gujarat. Varthema calls it the “port of
the Turks”; but by Turks we must understand Mohammedan inhabitants of
the Levant who had settled at Diu. It was an important halt for ships
trading between India and Arabia and Persia. The vessel which bore
Varthema must have been a tramp, picking up what cargo offered, and
altering her course from time to time, to dispose of it; for, after
spending two days at Diu, we find her taking a three days run up the
Gulf of Cambay to Gogo, a place “of great traffic, fat, and rich; where
all are Mohammedans.” She now recrossed the ocean to Eastern Arabia,
and put in at Julfar, on the shores of Oman. Once again she reversed
her course; and a favourable wind bore her to Muscat, a port which is
still of some importance, and which, at that time, was one of the small
independent States of Arabia. Then she tacked back, and came to New
Ormuz, a port on the island of Jeruan.

Old Ormuz was a city on the mainland, which Marco Polo visited in the
eighth decade of the Thirteenth Century, but, shortly after his time,
almost all the population deserted the old city for the island. As in
the days of Ibn Batûta it was famous for its pearl-fisheries. “Here,”
writes Varthema, “are found the largest pearls in the world”; and hence
it is that Milton couples the wealth of Ormuz with that of India.[18]
“At three days’ voyage from this island, fishers pay out ropes, one
from either end of their little boats. To each rope, a big stone is
tied, so as to keep the boat moored; and they pay out yet another rope
to the bottom, with a stone to it, from the middle of the boat, whereby
one of these fishermen, having hung two bags round his neck and tied
a big stone to his feet, goes down fifteen paces into the water, and
stays there as long as he is able, to find those oysters wherein are
pearls. These he puts into the bag, and gets quit of the stone at his
feet, and comes up by one of the ropes aforesaid.” The pearl-diver
is not given the wholly impossible time under water which Ibn Batûta
credited him with. With customary caution our Italian is content to say
that he “stays there as long as he is able.”

This trade and the city of Ormuz were in the hands of Arabs, who paid
tribute to the King of Persia, and were dependent for food on the
mainland. Ormuz was one of the great centres along that trade-route
between the East and the Levant, which traversed the Persian Gulf,
and made its way by Bagdad, and the Euphrates Valley and Aleppo to
the Mediterranean; just as Aden was one of the great centres of the
other route through the Red Sea and Egypt to Cairo and Alexandria. Our
traveller would pass along streets crowded with men from many nations.

From Ormuz comes a tale of cold-blooded parricide, fratricide, and
subtle perfidy very characteristic of the dynastic families of Asia.
“At the time when I visited this land, there happened that which you
shall hear.” The Sultan of Ormuz had eleven sons, of whom the youngest
was judged to lack half his wits, and the eldest was, beyond doubt, “a
devil unchained.” This Sultan had purchased two Abyssinian children,
and brought them up as carefully as if they had been his own sons;
for it was a practice in Arabia and India to rely on the valour and
sagacity of Abyssinian slaves, to entrust them with the most important
military commands, and to consult them as closest advisers. One of
these men was named Caim; the other Mohammed. One night, when, all was
dark and silent in the palace, that “devil unchained,” the eldest son
found an opportunity to put out the eyes of his father, his mother
and all his brethren excepting those of his youngest brother; for he
supposed him to be incapable of aspiring to the throne. Not satisfied
with blinding his victims, he caused them to be burned alive within
the palace-enclosure. Next morning he proclaimed himself Sultan; and
the supposed fool fled to a mosque; for the rights of sanctuary were
to be found there, if anywhere. At first, the city was in tumult; but
the bloody deed was over and done with; and a city of trade is soon
glad to quiet down and resume business. The problem now before the
new Sultan was: how to get rid of Caim and Mohammed. Both men were
in high position: that were a small matter; but they held command of
fortresses. Somehow, he managed to get Mohammed to venture into his
presence, and, after making much of him, breathed into his ear that,
if he would slay Caim, he should be rewarded with the command of five
fortresses. Mohammed protested: “‘O Sidi, I have shared bread with him
from our childhood; for thirty years. By Allah, I cannot bring my mind
to do this thing.’ Then said the Sultan: ‘Well, let it alone.’” Having
failed in the attempt to induce Mohammed to murder Caim, the Sultan now
tried to induce Caim to murder Mohammed. Caim made not the least demur,
and straightway sought out his old friend and companion. Mohammed at
once read what had happened written in the face of his false friend,
and charged him with the fact. Caim, guilt-stricken, cast his dagger at
the feet of Mohammed, fell on his knees, and implored forgiveness of
the meditated crime. Mohammed reproached Caim in the mildest way, and
then either from magnanimity or from policy, or from both, he passed
over his treachery; but made him vow to go to the Sultan and pretend
that he had done the deed.

“When the Sultan saw him, he demanded: ‘Hast thou slain thy friend?’
Caim answered: ‘I have, Sidi, by Allah!’ Then the Sultan: ‘Come here’;
and Caim went close up to him; whereupon, the Sultan seized him and did
him to death with his dagger.” Three days passed, and then Mohammed
stole stealthily into the Sultan’s chamber, who, when he saw him, was
greatly perturbed, and exclaimed: ‘O dog, son of a dog, are thou still
alive?’ Mohammed replied: ‘Yea, I live, in spite of thee, and thee
will I slay, thou worse than dog or devil!’ Both men being armed, they
fought together for a space of time; but in the end, Mohammed killed
the Sultan, and put the palace into a state of defence. But, because he
was much beloved, the populace ran thither with shouts of ‘Long live
Sultan Mohammed.’

Mohammed was a man as prudent and experienced as he was ready and
resolute: he saw a way to do the state good service and to preserve for
himself the reality of power while maintaining the shows of legality
and removing the occasions of envy. At the end of twenty days, he call
the chief citizens together, “and spake to them in this wise: That what
he had done had been of strong necessity; that he knew he had no right
to the throne; and that he begged them to allow him to transfer his
power to the son who was supposed to be crazy. And thus the son became
Sultan; but, nevertheless Mohammed rules. The whole city said, ‘of a
surety, this man is the friend of Allah.’ For which reason, he was made
Governor of the City and of the Sultan; the Sultan being in the state
aforesaid.”

A very narrow little strait lies between Ormuz and the mainland of
Persia. Varthema left his “tramp,” and crossed over. His itinerary
through the ancient and renowned Empire is by no means clear; but we
find him at Herat, 600 miles in a bee-line from Ormuz, and at that time
the capital of Khôrasân and the residence of its able ruler—Sultan
Hosein Mirza, a man who boasted his descent from Timour the Tartar.
Varthema speaks of Herat as being a great market for stuffs, especially
silk stuffs, and for rhubarb. Badger, commenting on this statement,
suggests that Herat lay on the direct route along which rhubarb was
conveyed between Thibet, Mongolia, and the West. Certainly exports and
imports of Persia, India, Turkestan and Afghanistan passed through
Herat.

It strikes one as singular that, although Varthema Would seem to have
journeyed some 1,500 miles in Persia, he says very little about the
country. This may be because the Venetians were directly acquainted
with that fascinating Empire; and consequent on this, a general
knowledge of it would spread throughout Italy. For, when the great blow
was struck at Venetian trade by the Turkish capture of Constantinople
and Negroponte, and the “Queen of the Adriatic” no longer held “the
gorgeous East in fee,” she sent three separate embassies on a bold and
perilous mission. She sought to secure the alliance of Persia against
their common foe, the Ottoman Turk. Few records of travel and adventure
are more animating or fuller of interest than those of the Venetian
Ambassadors, Barbaro and Contarini.[19] Varthema must have made a bold
journey. The “Adventures of Hadji Baba of Ispahan” probably furnish as
true and vivid a picture of what life and travel in Persia were like
in the early years of the sixteenth century as they do of that which
was to be experienced in the early years of the nineteenth century,
Persia has remained in the same case of what may be called immutable
instability from the days when she was won for Islam down to the days
of the immortal Morier and to our own times.

From Herat, he took the caravan-route back to Shiraz in Persia, a
journey of fully 700 miles. Here was a great mart for the turquoises,
rubies and other jewels of Khôrasân and Badakshan, as well as for musk
and ultramarine; and he learned something of the business capacity of
the Persian; he complains that “our musk”—that delight, with other
overpowering scents of his nation and time—“is adulterated by these
folk, who are master-hands for intellect, and misleaders beyond all
other peoples.”

It is a problem how Varthema contrived to cover such vast distances
on what was probably a lean purse. He is silent as to his financial
resources; as we have said it is unlikely that his private means were
considerable, and it would seem that he did not trade. As a Mameluke he
would receive payment which carried him to Aden; and the money which
the enamoured Sultana furnished him with would partly, if not wholly,
give him the means to reach Persia. But he employed his infinite
power to charm; he was burthened with no weak scruple as to blinding
a newly-captured friend and using him, with wise moderation, in the
service of that central purpose which was the heart of all his being.
And thus, as we shall presently see, like Iago, he made his fool his
purse. But he is capable of appreciating the good qualities of the
generous friend whom he made his dupe; and is careful to pay tribute
to him. If he must deceive in order to use him, it is to realize his
purpose of seeing the world at first-hand and recording its wonders.

After remarking on the tricks of Persian traders, he adds: “Yet I must
also say they are the best companions and the most generous among
men. I speak thus with knowledge; having had experience of a Persian
merchant of Herat in Khôrasân, whom I met in this city of Shiraz. He
had known me at Mecca two years before, and spoke to me thus: ‘Jonah,
what is your business here? Are you not the same man who went to Mecca
some time back?’ I replied that I was, and that to find out about the
world was the quest I was on. Then said he: ‘Allah be praised! for I
shall have a companion to make discovery with me. Do not leave me.’
We stayed on fifteen days in this same city of Shiraz.” Varthema’s
magnetic charm was at work; and luck stood his friend in bringing him
across this old acquaintance.

The twain set off together from Shiraz, bound for Samarkand in
Turkestan; for the merchant, whose name Was Cazazionor, insisted on
keeping Varthema with him, and presumably payed all expenses. But they
travelled through a land in turmoil. The struggle between the Ottoman
Turks established in Europe and the Turcoman dynasty of the White
Sheep established in Persia was happy indeed for the Christian world,
since it diverted the forces of Constantinople to the East at a time
when Europe lay divided and helpless, but it was disastrous for Persia
and ended by throwing her into confusion. Just now Ismail-es-Sufi, a
descendant from the Prophet, who had overthrown the forces of Bayazid,
and laid the foundations of a great Persian dynasty, which endured more
than two centuries, was consolidating a country which had been torn
by internecine strife. As is so often the case, religious differences
afforded the trumpet-call to the struggles of peoples. As in the days
of Ibn Batûta the Sunnites of the West fought the Shiites of the East
for domination; but they fought in the name of Allah and under the
banners of sectarian difference. In order to seat himself firmly on the
throne, the Great Sofi, for so Europeans called the monarch of the new,
able and powerful dynasty roused the enthusiasm of the native Shiites,
and converted the less numerous native Sunnites to his own true faith
by blood and iron. Varthema tells us that the Sofi was passing through
the land with flame and slaughter.

Cazazionor, finding the country so disturbed, thought it wise to return
towards Herat. So delighted was he with the personality and society
of “Jonah” that he offered to give him his niece to wife. She was a
beautiful girl named Sharus, a feminine noun in Persian as in other
languages, although it signifies The Sun. Cazazionor took Varthema with
him to his own home; which was probably at Shiraz; and presented the
young lady to him. She could not have attained womanhood; for he was
allowed to see her. He feigned delight at her beauty; but he says that
his mind was “bent to other things”—probably less on wife and children
at home than on his still insatiate desire for travel. After enjoying
Cazazionor’s hospitality for eight days, he returned with his host to
Ormuz, and took ship for Sind. They were landed at Joah, a port on
the delta of the Indus, and proceeded to Cambay, an important harbour
in Gujarat, whence fifty ships, laden with cotton, sailed yearly to
different lands.




CHAPTER VII.

THE PAGANS OF NARSINGA.


Before Batûta reached India, and therefore long before Varthema’s time,
Afghan chiefs had swooped down on the fertile plains of India with
the war cry of “Allah and the Prophet,” and Northern India, with the
exception of its southern and western districts, where the Rajpoots
maintained their independence, was now under the rule of various
Moslem despots. The Deccan was under the sway of a powerful Moslem
dynasty—the Brahmany Sultans; but what is now the presidency of Madras
and Mysore was divided into a number of petty kingdoms, subject to
the Hindu Râja of Narsinga. A full century of conflict had resulted
in a partial triumph of the Moslem: the sovereigns of Narsinga paid a
certain tribute to be left at peace, although the western coast was,
in a measure, protected by a wall of mountains. But Portuguese traders
had just sailed into the Arabian Sea and had established themselves
here and there at trading stations on the Malabar coast; and these they
had fortified. On his outward journey, Varthema, for obvious reasons,
showed no disposition to cultivate the acquaintance of these Christian
Europeans.

Gujarat was under the rule of Fath Khân, whom Varthema calls Sultan
Machamuth. “You shall now hear of the manner of his life. He and all
his people are Mohammedans; and he keeps twenty thousand horsemen
always with him. When he arises in the morning, fifty elephants, each
with a man atop, come to the palace and do him reverence; and this
is all the labour they are put to.... When he eats, fifty or sixty
different kinds of music discourse; such as trumpets, different sorts
of drums, recorders and fifes, and many others; and the elephants again
do him reverence.... The Sultan’s moustachios are so long that he
ties them up over his head, as a woman doth tie her tresses; and his
beard, which is white, comes down to his girdle.” Fath Khân was greatly
dreaded by his subjects; and they believed strange things concerning
him; stories which are worthy of the Arabian Nights. These Varthema
heard and set down, as did Barbosa, who travelled in the East a few
years after the Sultan’s death. Machamuth was reputed to eat poison
daily, so that, while he himself had become poison-proof, he had only
to spit at a foe and death followed within half an hour. “Every night
that he shall sleep with one of his three or four thousand women, they
shall take her up dead in the morning.”

The Sultan was continually at war with a neighbouring Hindu Râja; and
his Kingdom of Gujarat had been taken from the Jains—“a race which
eats of nothing wherein courseth blood, and will kill nothing that hath
life. They are neither Moors nor heathens; and I believe that, if they
should be baptised, they would all be saved by their good works; for
they never do unto others what they would not that others should do
unto them. For dress, some wear a shirt; some, only a cloth round their
middle and a large red cloth on their head; and their colour is tawny.
And the aforesaid Sultan took their kingdom from them because of their
goodness.”

These Jains, who at first, mainly differed from Buddhists in believing
that the purification of the soul resulted in a Heaven and not in
Nirvâna, and the relation of whose creed to Buddhism is far from being
clear, had built some of their remote and mysterious temples on the
heights of Gujarat, where through clouds of incense, female figures,
clothed in scarlet and gold might be seen, weaving strange figures and
chanting monotonous psalms. But these, Varthema, posing as a pious
Mohammedan, might not see; and he makes no reference to the famous
temples of Gujarat.

From Cambay, the Persian and our Italian sailed along the coast to
Chaul; thence to a port which has disappeared but which was near
Ratnagiri, on the Concan coast; and thence to the island of Goa. “On
this island there is a fortress by the sea, kept by a Mameluke with
four hundred other Mamelukes. If the captain shall come across any
white man he gives him much wage; but first he sends for two jerkins,
made of leather, one for him and one for him that wishes to take
service; each puts on a jerkin, and they fall to. If he prove himself
a strong man, he is put among the able men; but if not, he is set to
other task than that of fighting. The captain wages great battle with
the Râja of Narsinga” (Bijayanagar the capital of the Carnatic).

From Goa, seven days of land-travel brought the pair to “the city of
Decan” (Bîjapûr), a Mohammedan place where “the King lives in great
pride and pomp. Many of them that serve him have their very shoes
adorned with rubies, diamonds, and other jewels; so you may judge how
many garnish their fingers and ears. They wear robes or shirts of silk,
shoes and breeches after the style of sailors; and ladies go quite
veiled, as in Damascus.”

Thence they returned to the coast, and visited ports, many of which
have decayed or disappeared. These were subject, but not always
friendly, to the Râja of Narsinga; and the Kinglet of Honawar was
friendly to the Portuguese. But in spite of incessant warfare, life and
property were respected. The journey now lies along the Malabar coast
to Cannanore: “the port to which steeds are brought from Persia, and
you must know that the levy for each horse is twenty-five ducats....
Here we began to meet with spices.” Here, also, were Portuguese
established.

They now turned their steps to Narsinga, where Heemrâj held his court.
Varthema calls him “King,” and indeed he ruled, for like the Frank
“Mayors of the palace,” he had gradually usurped the powers of the
real Râja, and held actual sway in the place of an ancient race which
boasted an uninterrupted succession lasting seven centuries. The city
was great and grand; the court, splendid; the revenue, enormous; the
army boasted 40,000 horsemen and 400 elephants, and was constantly
doing battle with the Moslem and neighbouring Pagan States. “The
elephant wears armour; in particular, head and trunk are armed. To
the trunk a sword of two arms’ length is fastened, and as broad as a
man’s hand.” “Seven armed men go upon the said elephant,” shielded by
a sort of castle, “And in that manner they fight.” “The King wears a
cap of cloth of gold; and a quilted garment of cotton when he goes to
the wars; over this a garment beset with gold coins; and all manner
of jewels are at the border thereof. His horse wears jewels which
are of more value than are some of our cities. When he journeys for
pleasure, three or four kings and five or six thousand horsemen attend
him. Wherefore, one may account him a most powerful prince. The common
people go naked save for a loin-cloth.... In this realm you may go
where you list in safety; but it behoves you to beware of lions on the
way.”

Varthema was very much impressed by the singular structure and equally
singular habits of the elephant, and he speaks admiringly of its
sagacity and strength. He devotes a considerable space to this noble
beast; gives us the most accurate details; and recurs to the subject
over and over again.

The Persian jewel-merchant and he left Narsinga after two days’ stay,
and visited places which were of much importance then, but which have
disappeared from the modern map. At last, they arrive at Calicut.

“Having come to the place where the greatest fame of India is gathered
up” our traveller devotes the whole of his second book concerning India
to Calicut and the manners and customs of its people, as being those of
all the inhabitants of that part of the peninsula which lies between
the Malabar and Coromandel coasts. From time out of mind Calicut had
been a famous emporium; to it calico owes its name. When Islam arose,
the spread of the Mohammedan faith stimulated the enterprise of the
intrepid Arab sailor and merchant and of the renegade from Eastern
Europe and Western Asia. The activity of the hardy Arab found scope by
reason of the natural indolence of the Hindu and his dislike of the
sea. A rich and well organized traffic sprang up between Persia and
Arabia on the one side and China and the Spice Islands on the other.
Even in China, the Arab contrived to settle; and Calicut remained the
chief centre of the Eastern trade. Here, in the season of calm, might
be seen the leviathan junks of China; and, at all times, the ships
of every civilized Eastern people. But, by the time Varthema reached
Calicut, the Arab had found Malacca to be a more convenient mart for
the trade of the far-East; and Calicut, a little fallen from her high
estate, had become mainly a market for the products of Southern India
and Ceylon, and a port of call. And yet greater change was at hand.
One of those new routes had been opened up which from time to time,
abase the pride of commercial nations and transfer their wealth: the
Portuguese rounded the Cape, reached East Africa, broke across the
Ocean, and, in 1498, Vasco di Gama anchored off Calicut. The jealous
Arabs burned down the factory which the native ruler had allowed
the Portuguese to erect, and fierce seafights ensued, which were
accompanied by much brutality. The contest was between the best sailors
of Europe and the huge, but ill-built and ill-navigated fleets of the
Arab traders. The latter were unable to expel or even to discourage the
invaders, who, incensed at opposition, shewed no mercy, and suffered
from severe reprisal. While Varthema was at Calicut, the Zamorin (as
its ruler was called by those English travellers who arrived a little
later) “agreed that the Moors should slay forty-eight Portuguese, whom
I saw put to death. And for this reason the King of Portugal is always
at war, and daily kills very many; and thereby the city is ruined, for
in every way it is at war.” Our traveller arrived at Calicut at the
precise time when India, cast into a welter by Mohammedan aggression
in its lust for wealth and dominion, was confronted with the yet more
insatiate greed of European adventures for fabled gold and direct
markets. The competitors vied with one another in all the arts of
treachery, cruelty and fraud.

Calicut was a city of mean appearance, occupying an area of about a
mile; but the “compounds” were spread over a space of six miles. It
was crowded with traders from Ethiopia, Arabia and Persia, Syria and
the Levant, Bengal and Sumatra. Varthema calculates that no less than
fifteen thousand Moors were domiciled there. He visited the palace of
the Zamorin, which was divided into chambers by wooden partitions, on
which supernatural beings were carved—beings named dêvas in the Indian
Scriptures, and taken by our Italian for devils. The flooring was a
preparation of cow-dung, used then, as it is to-day, for its antiseptic
properties. Ramna and Krishna and a demon-goddess called Mariamma were
the chief objects of worship; so we are not surprised when we read
that, in the “chapel” of the palace, the oil-lamps were set on tripods,
“on each side whereof are three devils, _in relievo_, very fearful to
behold. Such are the squires that bear lights to the King.” The chapel
was small, but its wooden door was elaborately “carven with devils. In
the middle of it is a devil seated, all in bronze; and the devil wears
a three-fold crown, like unto that of the Papacy. He has four horns and
four teeth, a huge mouth and nose, and his eyes strike terror into him
that looketh thereon. Devils are figured around the said chapel; and
on each side thereof a Satan is seated, in flaming fire, wherein are a
great number of souls. And, the said Satan has a soul to his mouth with
his right hand and with his left hand he grips a soul by its middle.”
Perchance the chapel recalled memories of pictured hells on the walls
of the Pisan Campo Santo, or of certain other mediæval frescoes at
Florence.

He went to a great religious festival near Calicut. “Truly,” he
says, “never did I see so many gathered together save at Mecca. From
fifteen days’ journey round about came all the Nairs and Brâhmans to
sacrifice.” Passing through trees which bore lights innumerable, one
came to a tank, wherein the worshippers first bathed before entering
the temple, which stood up from the middle of the tank. It had “two
rows of columns, like San Giovanni in Fonte at Rome.” The head Brâhmans
first anointed the heads of the worshippers with oil, and then burned
incense, with elaborate ritual, and offered the sacrifice of a cock at
an altar laden with flowers. “At one end of the altar is a Satan, which
all go up to worship, and then depart, each on his own way.”

Early in the morning, it is the duty of the Brâhman to bathe in a tank
of still water, and then to wash the idols with perfumed water; after
which he burns incense before them; nor does the Zamorin eat of food
that has not first been presented to the god. “Then the Brâhmans lie
flat on the ground, but in a secret manner, and they do roll their eyes
in a devilish way, and twist their mouths horribly for the space of a
quarter of an hour; and then the time to eat is come. And men eat of
food which has been cooked by men; but the women cook for themselves.”

Varthema’s account of the manners and habits of Southern India
is neither so wholly accurate nor arranged with such lucidity as
Hiuen-Tsiang’s record of the region of Ganges and Jumna, written nine
centuries before. Nor does Southern India present us with such a high
civilization as does the empire of Sîlâditya. But Varthema makes few
statements that are not confirmed by other early travellers, and his
record bears ample witness to a shrewd, observant eye and honest
enquiry. He describes the Brâhmans; the Nairs, or warrior-caste; the
artizans and other castes of the Malabar Coast. We learn that no one
of the two lowest castes may approach a Brâhman within fifty paces
“unless he bid him do so”; wherefore they shout a warning as they pass
along, and take private paths through the marshes, for, should they not
cry aloud, and should any of the Nairs meet them, they may be killed by
him, and no punishment follow thereupon.

The Nairs “eat no flesh without sanction from the Brâhmans; but other
castes eat all manner of flesh, saving that of the cow.” The lower
castes “eat mice and fish dried in the sun.” All sit on the ground at
meals; and the upper castes use the leaf of a tree to scoop up their
food from metal bowls; while the lower castes make balls of rice and
take it by the hand from a pipkin. All castes and both sexes wear a
cotton loin-cloth only. The lowest sort of people suckle their children
for three months only, and then feed them on milk night and morning.
“And when they have stuffed them therewith, they do not wash them,
but cast them into the sand, where they lie until evening. As they
are nearly black, one cannot tell whether they be little bears or
buffaloes; and they look as if they were fed by the Devil.”

Justice was admirably administered—a characteristic of Hîndustân
noticed and praised by Greeks, Romans, Arabians, and all travellers. In
fact, life and property were fairly safe throughout all civilized Asia.
Creditors, on proof of claim, drew a circle round their debtor with a
green bough, and within this he must remain until he pay or perish.
Should he leave the circle, his life was forfeit to the Zamorin. Murder
was punished by impalement; wilful injury to another by fine. Traders
transacted business by secret negotiation under a coverlet, certain
signs being made with the fingers.

When a man is sick, he is visited by a dozen men, “dressed like
devils,” who are accompanied by players on divers instruments. “These
physicians carry fire in their mouths,” and go about on stilts fixed
to their hands and feet; and so they go shouting and sounding the
music; so that truly they would make a hale man fall to the ground
for fear at the sight of these ugly beasts. They force ginger juice
on the sick; and, in three days, he is well again—cured in the main,
one may surmise, by workings of belief on his expectant imagination.
Abracadabra is a useful and time honoured ally to the learned
professions. The spirits which preside over the fertility of rice are
propitiated in a similar manner by the same men. “When the Nairs die,
their bodies are burned with much pomp, and some among them keep the
ashes; but common folk are buried within the house or garden.”

Varthema tells us of certain social customs which persist to this
day in Southern India. The caste or tribe of Nairs who preponderate
there, maintain to-day the institutions of their ancestors before
history began. Marriage is acknowledged to be the least stable and
most diversified of all human institutions; but the Nairs retain
more than a trace of the matriarchate and of the polyandry which was
associated with the matriarchate. They count descent through the
children of sisters only; and marriage is with them the loosest of
ties; it involves no responsibility towards the woman or her child.
Again the worship of the snake, and, for obvious reasons, of the cobra
in particular, throughout India is a remnant of phallic worship. Let us
hear what Varthema has to tell us of a state of society which exhibits
a stage in the slow and fluctuating course of moral development from
primitive promiscuity to the high moral standard extolled, if not
completely attained, by the Christian West. There was a habit which
is still regarded in many parts of the world as the seal of amity and
the highest possible honour which a man can bestow on a friend. “The
Pagans exchange their wives.” Indeed, they bestowed them on a friend
with all the ready generosity of Cato the Censor to Hortensius. “And
when the King takes to himself a wife, he chooses among the most worthy
and honourable of the Brâhmans” him to whom shall be accorded the
_jus primae noctis_. The Brâhman affects unwillingness “and the king
must pay him four or five hundred ducats.” Here, almost for certain,
we have a vestige of old phallic worship. When the king is journeying,
he passes on his matrimonial privileges to a Brâhman. Among the
inferior castes, “one woman has five, six, and seven husbands, and even
eight.... The children go according to the word of the woman.” “The
son of one of the sisters of the late king follows him on the throne.”
As to serpent-worship, “you must know that, when the King of Calicut
has word as to the place where a nest of any of these vile animals is
to be found, he has a little house builded over it for water.[20] And,
if anyone should kill one of these animals or a cow, he would be put
to death. They say that these serpents are divine spirits; and that,
if they were not spirits, God would not have bestowed on them so great
power that, by biting a man but a little, he shall fall headlong and
straightway die.” “And when these Pagans go a journeying, it is held
for good luck to meet one of these creatures.... There are however,
great enchanters: we have seen them grasp deadly serpents.”

The Zamorin “wore so many jewels in his ears and on his hands, arms,
legs and feet, that here was a marvel to behold.” His treasury held
the immense collection of many previous reigns, stored up for time of
need. But that recent scourge of mankind, which spread so rapidly over
the world, and which every nation called by the name of a neighbouring
nation, had already reached India; this magnificent monarch had “the
French disease in the throat.”

When the King eats, Brâhmans, stand around him, at a space of three or
four steps distant, bending the back, and holding the hands before the
month. When the King speaks, there is silence, and much reverence is
paid to his words.

In the warfare between the States of Southern India, an economy of
bloodshed was observed which would have done credit to those Italian
warriors of whom Machiavelli tells how the condottiere captain was
circumspect to save his men, and the foughten field remained almost as
bloodless as a chessboard. The Princes went forth to battle with great
armies of foot-soldiery and elephants (but no cavalry), armed with
swords, lances, bows and arrows, and furnished with shields. But when
battle was joined, and the armies were distant from one another as far
as two cross-bows’ shots might carry, Brâhmans were ordered by one King
to go to his royal foe, and ask that a hundred Nairs should fight on
either side. Then the selected Nairs would meet midway between the two
armies and fight by established rule—“two strokes to the head and one
at the legs; and this though they should fight for three days. And when
from four to six on either side are slain, the Brâhmans go straightway
into their midst, and make both sides return to their encampments.”
Then the kings were wont to employ the Brâhmans again to bear messages,
one to another, asking if that were enough, or more were wished for.
“The Brâhman says ‘no.’ And the enemy says the same. Thus do they do
battle together; an hundred set against an hundred.”

Varthema tells us of the habit of betel-chewing and gives us many
other details of the life and manners of the people; of their skill as
workmen; of their wretched shipping and of their poor navigation. He
had the naturalist’s eye, and tells us much of the animals and plants
of the district. He describes the crocodile as a “kind of reptile, as
big as a boar, but with a greater head; it has four feet, and is four
cubits long. It is engendered in certain marshes. The natives say it is
without venom; but an evil beast; doing evil to folk by its bite.”

The Persian merchant had avowed that his desire was to travel, and not
to trade, for he had enough; but all the same, he was sufficiently
eager to find good markets. “My comrade,” whose name is now spelled
somewhat differently—Cazazionor becomes Cogiazenor—“being unable to
sell his wares for that the trade of Calicut was ruined at the hands of
the King of Portugal; for the merchants that were wont to hie thither
were not there, nor did they come; we set forth, taking the way of a
river, which is the most beautiful I have ever seen, and came to a city
called Cacolon, fifty leagues distant.” This “river”-way was by the
Backwater of Cochin.

Cacolon, like so many places visited by our traveller is not to be
found on a modern map, but was a mart of some importance in its day,
“because of pepper of the best which grows in these parts.” Here dwelt
a few native Christians “of St. Thomas, some of whom were merchants,
believing in Christ.” A little later on Varthema’s journey, he is
told of the tomb of the Apostle, “guarded by Christians.” That St.
Thomas was the first missionary to India, and that he was martyred
there is an ancient tradition. William of Malmesbury tells us in his
“Chronicles of the Kings of England” how “Alfred sent many presents
over sea to Rome and St. Thomas in India. Sighelm, bishop of Sherborne,
sent ambassadors for this purpose, who penetrated successfully into
India: a matter of astonishment even in the present time.” The legend
concerning St. Thomas is however not earlier than the Fourth Century.
Earlier tradition makes him the evangelist of Parthia; and St. Thomas
was probably confused with one Thomas, a bishop, who arrived on the
Malabar coast in the middle of the Fourth Century. The shrine of the
saint is in a suburb of Madras. Indian Christianity was an offshoot of
Syrian Gnosticism, and Indian Christians were subject to the authority
of the Nestorian Patriarch at Mesopotamia. “These Christians say,”
writes Varthema, “that a priest comes from Babylon every three years to
baptize them.”

The next place reached by the travellers was Quilon in Travancore, the
port of a powerful little kingdom “for ever at war with others.... At
that time the king of this city was the friend of the King of Portugal,
but we did not think it well to remain there, for he was fighting
others.” The contentions of these petty sovereigns with each other gave
the Portuguese the opportunity which has always offered itself to the
invaders of India, and which they have never been slow to seize.

From Quilon, they sailed to the south, touched at a place where there
was a pearl fishery, rounded the “head of India,” and arrived at a
port of the Carnatic, which Varthema calls Coromandel. The King of
Coromandel was also at war with a neighbour, so Cazazionor and other
merchants hired a “sampan,” or flat-bottomed boat, and, “at great
peril, by reason of many rocks and shoals,” sailed from the Coromandel
coast and reached Ceylon.




CHAPTER VIII.

FARTHER INDIA, MALAYSIA AND THE BANDA ISLANDS.


Alas! the visit was of little profit. As in Ibn Batûta’s time, nearly
two centuries before, the island was divided between four kings, and
“for that they were waging fierce war with each other, we could not
tarry long time there.” Another reason for the short stay made in
Ceylon was that Cazazionor got alarmed at false information concerning
the good faith of one of the Kings to whom he was to carry his corals
and saffron. This was given him by one of the Moorish traders who were
settled in the ports of the island. This gentleman had the same kind
of goods to dispose of as Cazazionor, and contrived to hoodwink the
Persian with a commercial astuteness and subtlety worthy of a later
age. Afraid that one of the kings would contrive to “convey” his
merchandise he departed in haste, and Varthema with him.

The latter made marvellous use of eye and ear during his few days’ stay
in Ceylon. He draws an admirable picture of the people, the climate,
the cinnamon, the rich fruits and other vegetable produce, the roses
and other flowers, the immense herds of elephants and the big rubies
of the island. He was told of the impression of Adam’s foot on a
high peak, but had no time to visit it, even had the fighting then
going on allowed of it. It shows how feeble was the authority of an
Indian overlord, and how little supreme sovereignty was concerned with
matters other than tribute, that the warring Râjas were the subjects
of the Râja of Narsinga, “because of rice, which is brought from
the mainland.” “Some have lances of cane and swords, and they fight
together with these; but they do not slaughter each other over much;
for they are cowards.”

Three days rowing brought them to Pulicat, a town a little north of
Madras. They abode with a Moorish trader, who eagerly bought the
large store of corals, saffron, figured velvet and knives Cazazionor
had with him. “As this land was waging fierce war with the King of
Tarnassari, we were not able to stay very long. After a few days we set
sail for the city of Tarnassari, which is at a thousand miles distance
from here. And we arrived there in fourteen days.” In fact, they sailed
across the Bay of Bengal to Tenasserim, a fertile province of the Malay
Peninsula, at that time tributary to Siam. We find that the Râja “is a
most powerful lord and is for ever at war with the King of Narsinga and
the King of Bengal. He has an hundred elephants in armour, which are
the largest I have ever seen. He keeps an army of 100,000 men, part on
foot, part on horse, ready for war. They are armed with small swords
and shields, some of which are made of the shell of the tortoise and
some are like those used in Calicut; and they have store of bows and
of lances, some of which are of cane and some of wood. When they go
to war they wear a garment much stuffed with cotton.... Much silk is
made there.” As usual, the domesticated and wild animals are described.
Varthema was much surprised at the size of the cocks and hens. “In this
land we took great pleasure from some of the things which we saw, and,
in particular, at the Moorish traders making some cocks fight every
day in the streets where they dwell; and the owners will wage even to
a hundred ducats as to which will prove to fight best. And we saw two
which fought five hours on end, so that, when it was over, both of them
lay dead.”

Tenasserim retained traces of phallic worship to an even greater degree
than Calicut did. The extreme mark of friendship, so far as the _jus
primae noctis_ was concerned, was extended to every visitor, preference
being given to white men from all lands; “for,” says Varthema of the
natives, “they are a most liberal and agreeable people.” Yet, this
obligation fulfilled, the husbands were most jealous of their wives,
and whosoever should attempt to maintain relations with them would
“put his life in jeopardy.”

At dead of night, the corpses “of every Brâhman and of the king are
burned, with solemn sacrifice to the devil. And they keep the ashes
in vessels of earth, baked into a kind of glass, with narrow mouths.
Such a vessel, with the ashes therein, is buried within the house. The
sacrifice is made under trees, as at Calicut. And the fire is fed with
all the perfumes that can be gotten ... together with coral. And while
the body is burning, all the music in the city is sounded; and fifteen
or twenty men, who are dressed as devils, stand there, with much
rejoicing. And the wife is there, making very great lamentation; but
no other woman.” Here Varthema saw the horrible practice of Suttee. He
tells us of another custom which strangely recalls the Romantic Service
of Love in the days of Provençal minstrelsy. A passionate youth will
burn his naked arm severely to prove to his mistress “that he loves her
and that he is ready to do any great deed for her.”

“As to the manner of refection in this city, the Pagans eat all flesh,
saving that of the ox, and eat on the ground from very beautiful
vessels of wood, without a coverlet. They drink water, sweetened if it
may be. They sleep on high beds of good cotton, with coverlets of silk
or cotton. They wear a robe, with a quilt of cotton or silk.... Their
ears are full of jewels; but of these the fingers are bare.”

We find that the son of the King succeeded to his father’s throne
here; and not the sister’s son, as in Southern India. Deeds conveying
property were written on paper instead of palm leaves. The bodies
of Moorish traders who were unhappy enough to die here were first
embalmed, and then buried, with the head turned towards Mecca. We are
told of the flat-bottomed boat, the double canoe, and the junk; the
latter carried small boats to Malacca, where they were unshipped and
sailed on to the Spice Islands.

Cazazionor was able to dispose of some of his goods at Tenasserim; and
then he and Varthema took ship for Bengal. Eleven days of fair wind
bore them across the Bay of Bengal to a city which the ever whirling
wheel of change has borne away, and the very site of which is indicated
only on some ancient and imperfect map. Banghella was one of the first
ports and one of the first cities of the age, situate on one of the
mouths of the treacherous Ganges—a river of shifting currents and
disappearing shores. Its Sultan was a Mohammedan, for ever at war
with the Hindu Râja of Narsinga. “Here,” says our traveller, “are the
richest traders I have ever met with. Every year, fifty ships are
laden with stuffs of cotton or silk ... and these goods go throughout
Turkey, Syria, Persia, Arabia Felix, Ethiopia, and India. Here also are
many merchants of jewels from other lands.... The stuffs aforesaid are
woven, not by women, but by men.” Like Ibn Batûta, he found Bengal the
cheapest place to live in of the whole world.

The records of old pilgrims and travellers are a riot of surprise. Not
one of the least unsuspected of Varthema’s adventures is his dropping
here on Christian traders, who came from a Chinese city, which probably
lay north of Pekin. “They had brought silken stuffs, aloes-wood,
benzoin, and musk; and said that in their land were many Christian
lords, subject to the great Khân of Cathay”—that is to say, to the
Emperor of China. The reader will remember that the Chinese Government
pronounced Christianity to be a satisfactory faith in Hiuen-Tsiang’s
time. Fra Oderico tells us of the considerable number of Christians
in China during the early years of the Fourteenth Century. Probably
the Christian Chinese whom Varthema came across were Nestorians;
strange products of the wasted subtlety of the Greek mind during its
theological degeneracy; followers of the heretic Nestorius, who upheld
that two natures, the human and divine, were in Christ’s body, but
separate from one another. We may hope that, after so many centuries,
such problems had ceased to perplex the good Christians of far-off
Cathay. They said that their home was at Sarnau, a place probably
identical with the Sanay or Sandoy of Fra Oderico. They wore their
native silken breeches and red-cloth caps studded with jewels—a proof
of the safety of the city-street and of the highways from land to land
under Eastern despotism.

Men are not wont to carry the bitterness of religious prejudice into
the market, where mundane profit is at stake; and Cazazionor, the
Moslem; Varthema, the Catholic renegade; and the Nestorian heretics
seem to have hobnobbed together very amicably. The latter were on
their way to Burma, and told Cazazionor that there he might exchange
some very fine branches of coral he had for rubies which would sell in
Turkey for ten times as much. They proposed that our travellers should
go on with them. So Cazazionor sold off all his merchandise, with the
exception of “corals, saffron, and two pieces of cloth of Florence
of a rose colour.... We departed from that place with the aforesaid
Christians, and voyaged towards a city which is called Pego (Pegu),
distant from Banghella some thousand miles.”

Now the King of Burma, being at war with the King of Ava, was away with
his army. The party chartered a long dug-out canoe, and followed him;
hoping to induce him to purchase. But they were forced to return, owing
to the war; and five days afterwards the King of Burma, having gained a
victory, returned to Pegu.

The very next day, the Chinamen, who, it would seem, had had previous
dealings with the King, visited him, and were told to return two days
later, “for that, the next day, he must sacrifice to the devil for
having triumphed. When the time named had passed, directly the King had
eaten, he sent for the aforenamed Christians and for my companion to
bring the merchandise before him.” They found the Râja magnificently
set in jewels: his head, limbs, fingers, and even all his toes sparkled
with precious stones; jewelled ear-rings dragged down the lobes of his
ears to the length of half a palm, and the rubies on him “were more
than the value of a very great city.... At night-time he shone like the
sun.” Yet this resplendent monarch was “so entirely human and homely
that a child might speak to him.”

Then Cazazionor and other merchants who would seem to have become his
partners in this business of the corals, uncovered them. The monarch
was so unbusinesslike, or allowed himself to behave so indiscretely,
as to show enthusiasm at the sight of such magnificent coral-branches;
“and truly there were two of these the like of which had never come to
India before.” Now begins an Oriental comedy, wherein the trader shall
simulate munificence, and extract tenfold from the monarch by craftily
working on his natural generosity or regal pride.

The King asked if the corals were for sale. The reply was that they
were at his service. The King sighed that war had emptied his treasury;
but he was willing to barter rubies for the corals. “We made him learn
through these Christians that all we desired was his friendship:
let him take the goods and do as pleased him. He answered: ‘I know
that Persians are a free-handed people; yet did I never see one so
free-handed as this man’; and he swore by God and the Devil that he
would see which should excel in generosity, he or a Persian.” So he
ordered a casket of rubies to be brought in, and commanded Cazazionor
to choose those he would like to have. “My companion answered: ‘O
sire, you show me so much benevolence that, by my faith in Mohammed,
all these things are a present, which I offer you. And understand,
sire, that I journey about the world not to gather merchandise, but
merely to see the different races of men and their ways.’ The King
replied: ‘I cannot overcome you in generosity, but take this which I
give you.’ And so he took a large handful of rubies from each of the
(six) divisions of the casket aforesaid, and gave them, saying, ‘Take
these for the generosity which you have shown towards me.’ And in like
manner, he gave two rubies each to the Christians aforesaid ... which
were worth about 1,000 ducats; and those of my companion were given a
value of 100,000 ducats.” The Chinamen were apparently content with a
commission of one per cent., for nothing is said of the vendor paying
any. “Wherefore,” Varthema continues, “by this, the King may be judged
to be the most free-handed ruler in the world; and his income is of
about a million a year in gold,” derived from lac, cotton, silk, and
valuable woods; and this he spent on his army.

The King gave the travellers free quarters which they occupied five
days; when there came news that war had again broken out with Ava. So,
having seen the burning of two widows, and other sights of Pegu, and
found the Burmese “very fleshly,” the Chinamen, Cazazionor and Varthema
embarked for Malacca.

It is possible that Varthema was not the very first European to visit
the city which had become the most important port in Eastern waters;
but it is certain that he was the very first European to describe it.
It had taken the place of Calicut; it was nearer the sources of supply;
the enterprising Arab had settled there and ruled the city, subject to
the payment of a tribute to the King of Siam; and the recent descent of
the Portuguese on the coast of Malabar had increased its importance.
Here were to be found the huge, unwieldy junks of China—those floating
towns, with gardens blossoming on their decks—for there was no longer
need for them to creep through the straits and take the perils of the
Indian Ocean; and the most halcyon of summer seas is never to be quite
trusted. Malacca was a cheaper market than Calicut; and hither were
sent the drugs, dyes, perfumes, and spices, the precious woods and
other productions of China, Banda, the Phillipines, Siam, the Moluccas,
Borneo, Java, and Sumatra. “Verily,” writes Varthema, “I believe that
more ships sail hither than to any other port in the world.” He remarks
on the infertility of the soil; but speaks of the wealth of Malacca
in sandal-wood and tin. The travellers were presented to the Moorish
Sultan, who had appointed a Governor to do justice; but the inhabitants
at that time were Javanese. “They take the law into their own hands;
and are the vilest race ever created on earth. When the Sultan shall
hinder, they say that they will no longer dwell on land, for that they
are sea-farers”—that is to say they were quite able and ready to make
a new settlement. “One may not go about here when it grows dark; for
folk are killed as if they were so many dogs; and all the traders who
come here sleep in their ships.” There was no market for jewels here;
and the Chinamen, who still acted as guides to our travellers, advised
them to be off. So a junk was hired, and the whole party turned back
through the Straits for Pider, on the northern coast of Sumatra.

We are told that the natives of Sumatra were far from being a bellicose
race. They were eager traders, very friendly to foreigners, excellent
swimmers, and skilful in filigree work. “There were three crowned Pagan
Kings; and their religion, way of life, dress, and habits are the same
as at Tenasserim; moreover, the wives also are burned alive.” The
houses were roofed with the shells of gigantic sea-turtles; and the
ships were three-masted, with a prow fore and aft. Here were huge herds
of elephants, finer than any he had seen; and the land was productive
of long-pepper, benzoin, different kinds of perfumed wood and the
silk-worm.

The Chinamen now became anxious to return to their own country; but
Cazazionor wanted to see the land of nutmeg and clove: could they
get there in safety? The Christians replied that they need fear no
robbers; but there remained the chances of the sea; the island could
not be reached in a large ship; a sampan must be bought. Two sampans
were purchased, manned, and provisioned; and then the wily Persian who
wished to keep the Christians as guides, began to work on them. “‘O
dearest friends,’ said he, ‘although we be not of your race, we are all
sons of Adam. Will you leave me and this other man, my companion, one
who was born in your faith?’ ‘In our faith? Is not your companion a
Persian?’ ‘He is a Persian now, because he was bought at Jerusalem.’”
Whether this statement was a convenient lie, told by Varthema to
Cazazionor, or was the calculated fabrication of the latter is not
apparent; but it was effective; for “the Christians, hearing the
name of Jerusalem, at once lifted up their hands towards Heaven; and
kissed the ground thrice, and asked when I was sold at Jerusalem. We
answered: ‘When I was fifteen years old.’” The Chinamen thought that
Varthema must remember his native land, and Cazazionor at once saw his
opportunity and used it. Quoth he: “‘He does indeed remember it. For
months my sole delight has been in listening to the things he told me
thereof; and he has taught me the words for the parts of the body and
for different sorts of food.’” This settled the matter. The Christians
consented to go on with them; and if Varthema would return to China
with them, he might remain a Mohommedan, and they would make a rich
man of him. “‘Nay,’ said Cazazionor, ‘I am much pleased to have your
company; but he may not remain with you: for, out of the love I bear to
him, I have given my niece to be his wife.’” A money-bargain settled
the question; in two days, the Sampan was ready. “We put many kinds of
food on board; and, in particular, the most toothsome fruits I ever
tasted; and took our course to the island of Banda.”

Not even Marco Polo or Fra Oderico had ventured so far towards the
rising sun. Varthema was the very first of European travellers to reach
the Spice Islands. One of those who “cannot rest from travel, but must
drink life to the lees,” he might, had he been a better lettered man,
have quoted the lines of his own great countryman:

  “Ma misi me per l’alto mare aperto
   Sol con un legno e con quella compagna
   Picciola dalla qual non fui deserto.”

(“I put forth on the deep open sea, in but a single ship, and with that
little band that had not deserted me.”) But if Varthema is no scholar,
is he not for ever revealing himself as a single-minded, enthusiastic
traveller; an excellent actor, and quite able to live up to his part, a
man of sound judgment, native wit, sly humour, and pronouncedly brave;
direct and unflinching of purpose; a little vainglorious, yet discrete?

The comrades traversed the landlocked straits of Malacca and the Java
and Banda seas, and after fifteen days found themselves on an ugly,
gloomy, and flat island, where dwelt “a beastly kind of men, without
king or even governor.... The administration of justice is not needed;
for the natives are so stupid that they could not do evil if they
would. They are pagans.” Such was this specimen of the Nutmeg Islands.
Two day spent here was more than enough for our travellers; so they set
sail for the Moluccas—the Clove Islands—and found “the people even
viler than those of Banda, but whiter; and the air is a little cooler.”
We have a full description of the clove tree and are told that cloves
were sold by measure, “for they understood not weights. We were now
wishful to change to another land, in order to learn new things and
all about them.” So Borneo was steered for; and, on the voyage, the
Chinamen took delight in questioning Varthema concerning Christians
and their faith. “And when I told them of the impress of our Saviour’s
face, which is in St. Peter’s, and of the heads of St. Peter and St.
Paul and many other saints, they advised me in secret that if I would
go with them, I should be a very great lord, because I had seen these
things. But I doubted if, after I had been led thither I should ever
come to my own land again; and therefore I kept me back from going.”
Varthema does not think of his indebtedness to his generous Persian
host; he has no use for the inconvenient fidelities of friendship or
the costly coercion of gratitude; such altruistic weakness did not
afflict the men of the Renaissance; “ma per sè foro”—“they were for
themselves.”

The temptation to visit China must have been strong for a man of
Varthema’s spirit. A few missionary friars had reached Mongolia in the
thirteenth century, a very few bold spirits had penetrated Asia as far
as China at the end of that and the beginning of the next century; and
Tartars kept up some commercial intercourse between Europe and China a
little later. But when the great Tartar Empire fell into decay, and the
Moslem recovered his grip of Central Asia, intercourse between West and
Farthest East became impossible. The few missionaries who set forth for
the Celestial Empire never returned, and China became a shadow and a
name to Christian Europe. But it would be no easy matter for Varthema
to slip away from the Persian just here and now; the difficulty of ever
returning from China, even should he reach it, would indeed prove a
formidable problem; and we may suspect, too, that the hardships of the
voyage and the heat and discomforts of the climate were beginning to
tell on Varthema’s iron nerve.

He found the natives of Borneo to be “Pagans, and good folk.... Every
year much camphor is shipped; which they say is the gum of a tree that
grows there. I have not seen it; and therefore I do not affirm it to
be so. Here my companion hired a ship.... We directed our course to
the very beautiful island called Java; and came there, always sailing
southward, in five days.” On the voyage, the skipper pointed out the
Southern Cross; and “told us that, to the south, beyond the island
aforesaid (Java) dwell sundry other sorts of men, who steer by these
stars which are set over against ours; and, further, they made known
to us that the daylight stays but four hours in those parts, and that
it is colder there than elsewhere in the world. Whereat we were much
solaced and gratified.”

Now, there is no inhabited land to the south of Java where the shortest
day is of four hours only; but the assertion of the Malay captain reads
as if he had visited Australia, or had gotten some true information
concerning that continent; and bold navigators of Malaysia _may_ have
ventured or been driven much farther over the Southern Ocean to a very
high latitude; or, the statement as to shortened hours of sunlight and
cold _may_ have been a mere inference from the progressive diminution
of the day and of heat in sailing south. It is said that indications of
the discovery of Australia a very little after Varthema’s time are to
be found on manuscript maps of unknown authorship. It is interesting
to find that the skipper steered by means of a compass, which was not
of Chinese make, for the magnet pointed to the north; and that he was
provided with a chart intersected by perpendicular and horizontal lines.

Java was under the rule of several kings: “some adore idols as at
Calicut; some worship the sun; others, the moon; many, an ox; very
many, the first thing they shall meet of a morning; yet others, the
devil.” Nonetheless, “I believe the natives to be the most true dealers
in the world.... Some use pipes, from which they blow poisoned arrows
from the mouth; which bear death however little blood they may draw....
Some eat bread made of corn; and some eat flesh of sheep or deer or
wild pigs; and some eat fish and fruits. Among the flesh-eaters, when
their fathers become so old as to be past labour, their children or
relatives put them up for sale in the market-place; and those that buy
them kill and eat them cooked. Likewise if any young man shall fall
into any dire sickness; and if those that have knowledge deem that he
shall die thereof, the father or brother of the sick one shall slay
him; and they do not wait for him to die. And, having killed him, they
sell him to be eaten of others. We, marvelling at such a business,
some traders of this land, to us: ‘O you dull Persians, why do you
leave such toothsome flesh to the worms?’ Whereupon, my companion cried
out ‘Quick, quick, to the ship; for never again shall these folk come
near me on land.’” This is a strange statement; but there is abundant
evidence as to the prevalence of cannibalism throughout Malaysia at
this period to confirm it. Yet, says Varthema, “justice was well
administered”; the natives clothed themselves in silk, camelot and
cotton garments; and traded with the gold and copper which their island
furnished abundantly, as well as the finest emeralds in the world. They
were a maritime people and fought their battles at sea.

Varthema had lost count of time. It was now the month of June. He was
south of the equator, and had crossed the ecliptic; and, directed by
the Chinamen, he found the sun casting a shadow in a direction the
reverse of that of northern latitudes. “And thereby we learned how far
we had come from our country, and stood amazed.... Having seen the
manners of the island, we saw no great reason for remaining there;
for we had to keep watch all night, lest some scoundrel should steal
up to us, and bear us away, and eat us. Wherefore, having called the
Christians, we told them that, as soon as they were ready, we would
return to our land. Before we set off, however, my comrade bought two
emeralds ... and two little male children with their private parts
wholly cut away; for in this island there is a sort of merchants who
follow no other calling than that of buying little children, from whom
they cut all away, so that they are left as if women.”

It is obvious that different communities, at varying stages of
civilization, inhabited Java; from “the truest dealers in the world,”
and those who administered justice well, down to bestial savages.
Tales, and perhaps evidence, of the cruel brutality of the Aborigines,
affected the imagination of Cazazionor and Varthema strongly; they
were not sure that the cannibals, finding themselves in the close
neighbourhood of “Persians,” and therefore quite unusual visitors to
Java, might not be tempted to try the flavour of a novelty; their
Chinese guides, moreover, had taken them to most of the parts of
Malaysia with which they were acquainted; the softening effect of an
equatorial climate relaxed their desire to push on into that cold and
gloomy region to the south, of which the Malay skipper had told them;
and it would seem that, out of commercial jealousy or from rude humour,
“merchants of the country” took a pleasure or sought a profit in
playing upon their fears. So they hired a junk, and sailed boldly over
the more open water, along the south-east coast of Sumatra, rounded the
northern extremity of that great island, and saw Malacca again on the
fifteenth day of voyage.

Here they stayed three days, while Cazazionor made up a cargo of spice,
perfumes and silk; and here “our Christian companions stayed on. It
were not possible to make a short history of how they wailed and
lamented; so that, verily, had I not had a wife and children, I had
gone with them” (this is the first and last time that Varthema mentions
the relatively unimportant fact of his being a yoke-mate and father off
the chain). “And likewise, they said they would have come with us, had
they known how to travel safely.... So they stayed behind, saying that
they would return to Sarnau; and we went on in our ship to Ciromandel”
(Negropotam). Probably the Chinese would take passage in some junk of
the fleet which came to Malacca every year.




CHAPTER IX.

SOME CUNNING MANŒUVRES.


Having unloaded the junk, our travellers chartered a sampan and sailed
to Quilon. Now Varthema was very silent about the Portuguese at
Cochin and Cannanore when he was on his outward voyage, and indeed he
discreetly avoided them, lest discovery of his nationality should wreck
his purpose. They must have been at Quilon, too, when he was there
before; for the Râja of the district had welcomed Pedro Alvarez Cabal
in 1503, and permitted the building of a Portuguese factory. There
were now 22 Portuguese settlers in this factory, which was fortified,
of course; and a wave of home-sickness swept over the traveller: “I
greatly desired to escape,” he says; “but I held on, because they were
few in number, and I was afraid of the Moors; for there were merchants
with us who knew that I had been to Mecca and to the tomb of the
Prophet; and I feared lest they should take it into their heads that I
would uncover their deceits; so I held me back from running away.” The
gist of this statement is that Varthema feared the Portuguese garrison
was too feeble to undertake the protection of a false hadji from the
fierce resentment which Cazazionor and the Arab traders would evince.
The excuse as to the uncovering of Mohammedan frauds is but a poor sop
to whatever Christian prejudice might remain in Italy. His work done,
he was on the look out for a really favourable opportunity of returning
to Europe. He had small dread of failure. He had not lost his nerve in
the least, this son of the Renaissance of so infinite resource, of such
invincible self-confidence and of ability to match; unshakably resolute
when confronted with any peril that was unavoidable, and deterred by
no feeble scruple when by any means it was possible to evade it; one
wholly sincere in gaining his end—a man of “_virtu_,” a manful man, as
the Italians of his day termed it.

After a stay of twelve days at Quilon, the pair voyaged along the
Backwater of Cochin to Calicut, and arrived there in ten days. There he
found two Milanese refugees who had deserted from the Portuguese ships
in which they had arrived at Cochin. It at once occurred to his quick
brain that he might use these fellow countrymen of his. “Never had I
more joy than in beholding these two Christians. They and I were going
about naked” (i.e. girt with a loin-cloth only) “after the manner of
the country. I asked them if they were Christians. Joan Maria answered:
‘Yea, verily.’ Then Piero Antonio asked me if I were a Christian. I
answered: ‘Yea, praise be to God.’ Then he took me by the hand and led
me to his house. And when we had come thither, we began to embrace and
to kiss each other and to shed tears. In sooth, I could not speak like
a Christian; my tongue seemed to be unwieldy and hampered; for I had
been four years without speaking to (European) Christians. I spent the
night following with them; and neither they nor I could eat or sleep,
because of our great joy. You may think how we wished the night were a
whole year, that we might talk together of diverse matters.” Varthema
ascertained that these Milanese were skilled in the making of ordnance,
and had instructed the natives in their art, which had brought them
the favour of the Zamorin. Hence they feared to return to a Portuguese
settlement and, indeed to attempt to escape by land. Experience had
sharpened Varthema’s inborn ability at stratagem; and when he returned
to Cazazionor in the morning and was asked where he had spent the
night, he replied: “at the mosque, rendering thanks to Allah and to
Mohammed for the blessing of a safe return; whereat he (Cazazionor)
was much pleased. And, so that I might learn what was going on in
the land, I told him I meant to keep on sleeping at the mosque, and
that I did not hanker after riches, and that I wished to remain poor.
And, wishing to make my escape, I saw no way but by deceit; for the
Mohammedans being the most stupid of all folk, he was satisfied. And
this I did to be able to talk often with the Christians; for they had
daily word of everything from the court of the King. I began to act
out my deceit, and put on the Moorish saint, and never would partake
of flesh, excepting at the house of Joan Maria; but there we eat two
brace of fowls together every night. And I would no longer mix with the
merchants; nor did any man see me to smile; and I kept in the mosque
all day, save when he (Cazazionor) sent for me that I should go eat
with him; and he rebuked me for not eating flesh. Quoth I: ‘Eating
overmuch leads man to sin greatly.’ And so I began to be a Moorish
saint; and the man was happy who might kiss my hand, and some my knees.”

Luck was, as usual, on Varthema’s side. A merchant, a great friend
of the Persian, falls sick, and our new _Santon_ (holy man) is asked
to visit him. He and Cazazionor go to the sick man’s house together;
and Varthema assumes the air of a skilled physician, and puts various
medical questions in the most approved manner. “Then my companion
turned to me and asked: ‘O Jonah, knowest thou of any medicine for this
my friend?’ I answered: ‘My father was a physician in my land, and what
I know is by that practice which he taught me.’” Then the Persian asked
“Jonah” to do his utmost. “‘Then’ quoth I: ‘In the name of Allah, the
Pitiful, the Compassionate One!’ and felt his pulse, and found him to
be very feverish.’” Questioning the patient in true professional style
“Jonah” found that he was suffering from some intestinal obstruction.
So our physician administered a series of clysters “which did more harm
than good”; for by a singular blunder he had used astringent herbs in
their preparation, and forgot to warm the last clyster, which put the
patient into agony. Then a scene ensued which is told with Rabelaisan
directness and is as coarsely comical as that pursuit of Monsieur
de Porceaunac by the apothecaries, which delighted the court of the
_Grande Monarque_. Jonah is a man of resource and unconquerable force
of will; he has his man hoisted by the heels, and keeps him suspended,
hands and head only touching the ground. The unhappy patient roars
for mercy: “Stop, stop; I am killed, I am killed”; and Cazazionor
exclaims: “O Jonah, is it your practice to do thus in your land?”
Varthema preserves the assurance of the orthodox physician who cannot
err; he asserts that it is no error, and goes on when the sick man
is at the point of death. This last remedy is efficacious, however,
though it leaves the patient in a painful condition; and Jonah, who
was by no means without some grains of human compassion, ordered him
some excellent remedies and gave him still better advice. The story
which is told with a strong sense of humour, ends with a prescription
worthy of the famous Abernethy. The patient is restricted to two meals
a day; and is to take a mile of exercise before each of them; “for
these folk eat eight or ten times a day. This order seemed to him to
be without ruth. However, in the end he was wholly cured ; and thus my
hypocrisy gat me great reputation. They said that I was the friend of
Allah. This merchant would have me to take ten ducats; but I would take
nothing. I even gave three ducats which I had to the poor; and this I
did openly, so that they might know that I had no desire for gold or
gear. Henceforward, happy was the man who might give me to eat at his
house; happy he who kissed my hands and feet; and, when anyone kissed
my hands, I played my part, letting him know that, being a saint, he
gave me my desert. But my companion gat me most credit; for he also had
faith in me, and said that I eat no flesh, and that he had seen me at
Mecca and before the body of Mohammed, that I had always journeyed with
him, that he knew my ways, that I was in verity a saint, and that,
knowing me to be holy and devout, he had given me one of his nieces to
wife. Thus, all men were my well wishers; and every night I went in
secret to the Christians.”

At last, the Milanese told Varthema that there was word of twelve
Portuguese vessels having arrived at Cannanore, and advised him to try
to get there by land. He confesses that his courage failed him for an
enterprise so hazardous; “for I might be killed by the Moors, I being
white and they black.” The news was confirmed by two Persian traders
who arrived from Cannanore, and who were immediately invited by the
hospitable Cazazionor to sit down and eat with him and Varthema, who
was with him at the time. The traders said that the Portuguese were
building a strong fort at Cannanore: “What kind of people may these
Portuguese be?” asked Cazazionor of Jonah. “I answered: ‘Do not speak
of such a people; for they are robbers and sea-thieves one and all.
Would I could see them all of our Mohammedan faith!’ Whereat he became
very filled with malice; and, privily, I rejoiced.”

Next day, the Mohammedan traders, fully alive to the fact that the firm
establishment of the Portuguese in India meant the ruin of their trade,
flocked to prayers at the Mosque, and took Varthema with them. None but
so holy a man should be _imam_ and lead the prayers on such a grave
occasion. So we find him solemnly reciting the Koran.

During the next few days, he pretended to be very ill, and, in answer
to Cazazionor’s anxious enquiries, said he thought that the air of
Calicut did not agree with him. The attachment of the Persian to
Varthema was sincere and deep, and he was not in the least suspicious.
He urged the new-found saint to go to Cannanore until they should be
able to return to Persia together; he had a friend there who would
give him hospitality. Varthema affected to hesitate “because of those
Christians.” Cazazionor replied that there was no need to fear; he
should remain within the city. “In the end, having paid good heed to
the fleet which was being made ready at Calicut, and the army which had
been mustered against the Christians, I set out to give them word of
it, and to save me from the hands of dogs.”

But first he came to a final understanding with the Milanese. Then
there were two dozen Persian, Syrian, and Turkish merchants with
whom he was friendly at Calicut. Which would be the better course:
to take leave of them, and so, possibly, to set them talking, and
arouse suspicion; or to slip away, and so, if some ill-chance should
stop him, to condemn himself by having observed secrecy? He decided
to be off without speaking about it to any one except Cazazionor and
his two friends who were about to return to Cannanore. So, early one
morning, he set out in a boat with these two Persian merchants who
kept silence about their journey because they were trying to evade the
export-duties levied by the Zamorin. But their little bark had only
got a bow-shot from the shore, when Nairs shouted to the skipper to
return at once. They demanded by what right he was carrying Varthema
off without sanction. “The Persians answered: ‘this man is a Moorish
saint; and we are going to Cannanore.’ ‘We know full well that he is
a Moorish saint,’ replied the Nairs; ‘but he understands the tongue
of the Portuguese, and will tell them of all that we are doing; for a
great fleet is being made ready;’ and they laid strict command on the
captain of the ship that he should not give me passage; and he went
by it. We stayed on the beach; and the Nairs went back to the King’s
house. One of the Persians said: ‘Let us go to our lodging,’ that is,
to Calicut. I said ‘Do not go back; for you will lose these fine pieces
of cloth, seeing that you have not paid dues to the King.’ The other
Persian said, ‘O sir, what shall we do?’ I answered ‘Let us go along
the shore until we shall find a _prau_,’ which is to say, a small bark;
and they fell in with this; and we went twelve miles of march, laden
with the goods aforesaid. You can figure to yourself how my heart beat
at finding me in so great danger. At last, we found a _prau_, which
bore us to Cannanore.”

He immediately went to Cazazionor’s friend with his letter of
introduction, wherein was a request that “Jonah,” who was a saint, and
about to become a relation, should be entertained as if he were the
writer, until such time as he should arrive. The merchant laid the
letter on his head, and vowed that he would answer for his guest with
that organ. A feast was prepared; but, alas! the ascetic saint, however
resourceful and however hungry after the journey and its perils, must
keep to his rôle, and could only look on—a Tantalus of the Sixteenth
Century. The repast finished, the company took a little walk by the
sea, and Varthema marked where the fortress of the Portuguese was a
building, and resolved to try for liberty the very next day.

He was up early in the morning, and expressed a desire to stroll
about. The Persians said: “Go where you please”; but they went with
him. He contrived to lead them in the direction of the fort and to
get a little ahead of them. Happening to come across two Portuguese,
he declared himself to be an escaped Christian; and one of them
immediately hastened back to the fort, taking Varthema with him.
Lorenzo de Almeyda, son of the Viceroy and Commandant of the fort
was at breakfast. Varthema cast himself on his knees before him and
besought protection. Just at this instant, the hubbub at Cannanore,
which arose on the discovery of Varthema’s escape, dinned in their
ears. The artillerymen made ready; but everything quieted down; and
Varthema revealed the preparations for war which were being made at
Calicut. Lorenzo de Almeyda sent him to his father Don Francisco,
the Viceroy, who was at Cochin, where the Portuguese had supported a
revolting tributary, and made themselves masters of a little State.

The Viceroy, delighted at getting accurate word of the designs in
progress at Calicut, gave a very favourable audience to the refugee.

Varthema was quite sensible of the generous hospitality and sincere
affection which Cazazionor had bestowed on him. He not merely mentions,
but reiterates the fact. Yet he exhibits not the smallest compunction
at having tricked and deserted him. All moral obligation was as a
feather, when weighed against the achievement of personal freedom and
that self-fulfilment which was the goal of the Italian of his period.
One wonders what were the sentiments of that deluded and forsaken
friend. As for Varthema, once more among Europeans, and those Europeans
of a cognate race, he absorbs their prejudice against Orientals and
“Moslem dogs”; and one realizes how deeper even than to-day, and how
impassable, was the gulf which separated East from West. It is to his
credit that he faithfully fulfilled his promise to Joan Maria and
Piero Antonio; he obtained a pardon and safe-conduct for them from the
Viceroy, and a promise as to their safety from all officials who might
put an obstacle in the way. To induce the Viceroy to grant a pardon
was easy; for that dignitary was aware that he was likely to deprive
the foe of two artillerymen and add them to his own forces; moreover
he would learn much from the intermediary messengers who were to be
sent to them. On Varthema’s return to Cannanore, he found a serviceable
Hindu, whom he sent five times to the two Milanese, holding his wife
and children as a pledge of faithful service. The Milanese were
instructed to say not one single word to their wives, who were natives,
or to their slaves; but to leave these behind them, and steal off, at
dead of night, with what money and valuable jewels they could bring
with them. All was arranged; but a slave had been stealthily watching
his master’s doings; he went to the Zamorin, and told his tale. The
Zamorin refused to credit it; but put a guard over the Milanese. The
slave, who probably was filled with a spirit of revenge, for which he
may have had good cause, next went to the Moorish Cadi. The enraged
traders, when the secret doings of the Milanese were made known to
them, collected a hundred ducats and sent this to the “King of the
Yogis,” or ascetic Fakirs. Presently, the homes of the Christians were
surrounded by a mob of Hindu devotees, sounding horns, and yelling for
alms. “They want more than alms,” said the unhappy men. The fanatics
rushed the houses; and, although the two Europeans fought desperately
for their lives, they were slaughtered; yet not before six Yogis lay
dead at their feet, and forty were wounded. It was reported that the
infuriated Hindus cut their throats when they had overwhelmed them and
drank their blood.

Somehow, the native wife of Joan Maria contrived to escape from
Calicut, and made her way to Cannanore, bringing her little son with
her. Varthema, although he had left his Persian benefactor without
a sigh, was touched at the condition of the little half-caste. He
remembered the aid which the Milanese had given him and the pleasant
nights they had spent together; and the tragedy which had ensued on
their intercourse pierced his feelings. He became the guardian of his
friend’s son, purchasing him for eight ducats in gold, and getting him
duly baptized. But the little fellow was fatally infected with the new
scourge, which it would seem the Portuguese had brought with them to
the East, and he died exactly a year after baptism. “I have seen this
scath three thousand miles beyond Calicut,” says Varthema; “and it is
said that it began about seventeen years aforetime; and that it is far
worse than ours.”




CHAPTER X.

WAR BY LAND AND SEA


Albeit sheltered by a cognate Latin people, our traveller had by no
means found a haven of perfect safety. In a few days, we find him
taking his part in a great sea-fight between the Portuguese fleet
of eleven ships (of which two were galleons and one a brigantine),
commanded by Don Francisco de Almeyda, and the great Indian fleet
of two hundred and nine sail, which had gathered together from all
those parts of the Malabar coast which remained in the hands of the
Mohammedan traders. But only eighty-four ships of the Mohammedan fleet
were large sail; the rest being _praus_, mainly propelled by the oar.
Nor were they all meant to fight: many of them were traders under
convoy. As they approached, “it was as if one looked on a very big
wood.” Varthema, restored to western civilization and Christianity,
is borne away by the inexorable spirit of the Portuguese sea-dogs.
Never saw he braver men and he is with them in their prayers to God
“to confound the heathen faith.” He tells us how the Admiral incited
his men, by the passion of Christ, to thrust at these dogs; for this
is the day which shall cleanse them from their sins; and how the
Spiritual Father, crucifix in hand, exhorted them in language so
beautiful that the graceless men shed tears. All received absolution,
and then the Admiral sailed past two galleons of the foe, firing
broadsides into them to find out of what mettle they were. Nothing
further happened that day; and next morning, the Moorish Admiral made
certain overtures to be allowed to pass by in peace. “Sail by if you
can,” was the reply of the Portuguese Admiral; “but first learn what
manner of men we Christians be.” “Mohammed is our trust against you
Christians,” retorted the Moors, and then they crowded all sail and
plied the oar. Don Francisco de Almeyda let them come on until they
were immediately off Cannanore; “‘for he wished the ruler of the city
to see what stuff Christians were made of’.... And when the time to eat
had come, the wind freshened somewhat and our Captain said: ‘now, up,
my brothers; now is the time,’ and sailed for the two biggest ships.”
The Moorish fleet struck up all kinds of weird, inspiriting music while
the fleets met. Thrice did Almeyda’s men cast their grappling-irons on
the largest galleon, and thrice they failed; but the fourth attempt
was a success. The retaliatory cruelties of the Moors at Calicut
were remembered, and not one of the six hundred crew was suffered to
escape. Another Moorish vessel was boarded, and five hundred Moors
were slaughtered. But the enemy still fought desperately and well, and
managed to divide the Portuguese fleet. The galley commanded by João
Serrão, who had taken Varthema from Cannanore to Cochin was surrounded
by fifty vessels, great and small; and the brigantine was boarded by
fifteen Moors, who drove its crew to the poop. But the captain, one
Simon Martin, called aloud to Jesus Christ for victory, smote off
half a dozen Moorish heads with his own hands, and cast such fear
into the surviving boarders, that they threw themselves into the sea
for safety. Four other Moorish vessels now drew on; but Martin saved
the situation by seizing an empty barrel and making as if it were a
mortar; and seeing this, the attackers turned back. Don Francisco
de Almeyda then sailed into the very midst of the convoyed traders,
captured seven of them, laden with spice and other goods, and sank
nine or ten more by gun-fire, amongst which was one with a cargo of
elephants. The Moors fled, and the pursuit was kept up by ships’ boats,
to prevent any attempt at swimming ashore. About two hundred swam
twenty miles and escaped; but cross-bow and lance put an end to most.
Next morning all the corpses that could be recovered from the waves, or
the shore, or from captured ships, were counted: they numbered three
thousand six hundred; but, “by God’s grace, no Christian was killed
on galley or other ship; but many were wounded during the long day of
battle.” The Moors were a match for the Portuguese in battle, but not
in artillery, ships or seamanship. This sea-fight took place in March,
1506, and three months later the Viceroy rewarded Varthema’s services,
by making him head-factor of the Portuguese warehouses. A man with so
much knowledge of Mohammedan and Hindu customs and method, speaking
Arabic, and with some smattering of the native tongue; a man, withal,
with such experience of the ways of the world, so diplomatic, and so
masterful, would be invaluable. A little later, he was sent from Cochin
to Cannanore to get behind the curtain of certain frauds; for traders
from Calicut had got safe-conducts there by passing themselves off as
residents of Cannanore. About this time the Râja of Cannanore died; and
the new sovereign was no friend to the Portuguese. He got artillery
from the Zamorin, and, from the 27th April until the 17th August there
was open war, begun by Moorish traders, who attacked the Christians
when they were going to a well to draw water. The latter retired to
the fort, in good order; and Varthema and 200 men held it, under the
captaincy of a certain Lorenzo de Britto. They had nothing to eat but
nuts, rice and sugar. Water they had to draw from a well a bow-shot
off, after fighting for it all the way. The investing force had more
than 140 cannons; but, although it consisted of thousands of men, they
were mainly armed with bows and arrows, spears, swords and shields.
This host would rush on with fury, inspired by musical instruments of
many kinds and the splutter of fireworks; but they never got within two
stones’ cast of the fort; and every day half of a score of them were
killed and the rest fled. “They said we kept the devil with us for our
defence.”

At last, up came the Portuguese fleet under Tristão da Cunha, of
unperished name, and his three hundred knights in shining steel, who
were dissuaded with difficulty from burning Cannanore to the ground.
The ocean, up to now the auxiliary and defence of the Peninsula and its
Moorish traders, had become a highway for the enterprise of the armed
fleets of Europe. On the arrival of this strong force, the Râja and the
Moorish traders sued for peace, which the Viceroy had the foresight to
grant. For, whatever victories the Portuguese might win, and at however
small a cost, their position in the East was precarious. The Mohammedan
world was weak as against Europe for the same reason that Europe was
weak as against Constantinople: it was divided. Should the spirit of
resistance once become so strong as to overcome local jealousies, with
the whole Mohammedan world set aflame in Europe, Africa and Asia, and
with the countless hosts of the Far East at the call of the Mohammedan
trader, where had the Portuguese—nay where had Europe been?

Varthema, once again a devout Catholic, tells us how he spent leisure
hours when there was peace with the natives, in trying to convert some
of his old acquaintance among the traders of Cannanore to Christianity.
He professes great disdain for the simplicity and ignorance of these
Pagans! and the arguments he used were not precisely scrupulous, and
were far from skilful.

In November, 1507, at the request of the Viceroy, Varthema accompanied
him and Tristão da Cunha to the assault on Ponani, a port to the south
of Calicut. He tells us how, after the customary prayers and spiritual
monitions, “a little before break of day, we opened war to the death
on these dogs, who were eight thousand; and we, about six hundred.”
Native troops have never had a chance against European arms and
discipline. The disproportion of the opposing troops was about the same
as at Plassey, two centuries and a half later; and if all De Almeyda’s
troops were Europeans, as Clive’s were not, the latter were all led by
European officers and trained in European methods. And if, opposed to
Clive and the famous Thirty-ninth _primus in Indis_ there were a few
French auxiliaries, opposed to De Almeyda and Da Cunha were 64 Moors
vowed to victory or death, “for each one of them was master of a ship.”
“But God gave us His help, so that none of our folk were slain here;
yet we killed 140; and of these, with my own eyes, I saw Don Lorenzo
slay six; and he got two wounds; and many others were wounded also. For
a little while the battle was most fiercely fought. But our galleys
neared the shore; and then these dogs began to give way: and for that
the water (of the river at Ponani) began to fall, we followed them no
farther. But these dogs began to swell their numbers; so we set fire to
their ships, burning thirteen thereof, most of them newly builded and
big. And then the Viceroy withdrew all his troops to the headland; and
here he made some knights; and of these, of his grace he made me one;
and that most valiant leader, Tristão da Cunha, was my sponsor.” And
then they all embarked for Cannanore.




CHAPTER XI.

THE NEW WAY ROUND THE CAPE.


The home-bound fleet was now loading. Varthema had given the Portuguese
a year and a half of faithful service; he tells us that he was anxious
to return to Europe; he had had fully five years of perilous wanderings
through Moslem and Pagan lands to where no European foot hitherto had
pressed the soil; and he was urged “by the affection and kindly feeling
I bore my country, and my desire to carry thither and place upon record
news concerning a great part of the world.” The grace demanded was
freely given to one who had worked and fought so well; and on December
6th, 1506, a fortnight after the last great fight, he went on board,
and the San Vicenzo and other great ships set sail.

A long voyage across the ocean brought the fleet to the coast of what
is British East Africa to-day. Malinda, Mombasa and the island of
Pemba were touched at during the voyage along the eastern coast; then,
Kiloa, the extreme limit of Ibn Batûta’s voyage, a German port not
so long ago; then, the Comoro islands, together with several other
trading-places which the Portuguese had seized and fortified. All this
part of the “Dark Continent” had been long peacefully penetrated by
Arab traders and had profited by commercial intercourse with them;
and the natives were incited to expel the intruder. The appearance
of a rival had infuriated the Moslem trader, and the natives caught
something of his spirit in resisting the new comers. They were now
beginning to experience the tender mercies of the Christian. The
Portuguese spread their faith among the palm groves of the South after
the fashion of the Teutonic knights over the heaths of Prussia. They
used the sword mercilessly; they burned towns and wrought every horror
that can be inflicted by the passions of men released from discipline
and from the restraints of a long voyage—men stimulating each other to
brutality by mutual example, and infected with that mad fury which is
apt to possess any excited gang. But Varthema tells us of the pleasure
he felt at the successes of the Portuguese and the spread of Catholic
truth. He found Pagans were baptized daily in Africa, as in India.
“From what I have seen of India and Ethiopia,” he writes, “methinks
the King of Portugal, should it please God, and his victories go on,
will become the richest King on earth ... he is the means whereby the
Christian faith is spread daily; wherefore it may be credited that God
hath given him victory and will continue to prosper him.”

We must not accuse our whilom Mameluke of any grave insincerity in
writing thus. No doubt he had an eye to the good will of Julius II.,
and the Catholic public; but every son of the church was expected to
express himself in this way, and every son of the Renaissance was ready
to do so. As has been said, the Italian of the age was not burthened by
any undue sense of sin or overvexed about religion. These high matters
were the care of a special profession—the clergy—and of an organized
institution—the Church. The direst lapses into iniquity were “bad
shots,” as sins were called by the Greeks—mere unfortunate glancings
aside from the bull’s eye—and absolution was easily obtained. The main
thing was to aim at making life a full, rich, and splendid success.
None the less, the Rock of St. Peter was at once the emblem of European
Civilization and the foundation on which in theory it rested: The
Church and European civilization must be spread, to put an end to
Mohammedanism, that enduring peril, and the Paganism from which it
drew its recruits and no small measure of its wealth and power. This
is what lies at the bottom of Varthema’s mind. The King of Portugal is
destined to become the wealthiest and most powerful of rulers; and the
possession of wealth and the unrestricted exercise of power of every
kind, mental and moral and physical was the ideal of the age and the
reward of its _virtu_.

At Moçambique, an island off what is still Portuguese East Africa,
the fleet remained fifteen days to take in provisions, and Varthema
crossed to the mainland. He tells us of the blackness of the natives;
of their woolly hair, thick lips, and “teeth white as snow”; of how
the men wore bark and the women leaves as a loin-cloth; and of the
clicking of their speech, like the noises, made by tongue and palate,
with which the muleteers of Sicily urge on their steeds. (So probably
at some time Varthema had visited Sicily). Finding these negroes
“few and vile,” he and five or six others armed themselves, engaged
a guide, and went on an excursion. They saw great herds of elephants
roaming about; but by collecting dry wood, and setting fire to it,
they scared the great beasts away. Yet, in the end, they were chased
by three she-elephants who had their calves with them, and had to make
for a hill in all haste. They escaped with difficulty, and doubtless
had not done so but for the mothers of the herd being hampered by the
calves they found themselves called upon to protect. The party crossed
some ten miles over the ridge and came to cave-dwellers, of whom they
purchased fifteen cows for a little rubbish of European manufacture.
When on the way back to the ship, they heard a great uproar. It came
from the caves, and greatly alarmed them, until they understood from
the signs made by two negroes, who were driving the cows, that they
need have no fear; and their guide assured them that these people were
only quarrelling as to which of them should be the possessor of that
rare treasure, a little bell.

Sailing from Moçambique between the mainland and San Lorenzo (as
Madagascar was then called), our traveller remarks that in his belief
“the King of Portugal will soon be lord thereof; for two places there
have already been seized and put to fire and flame.” After the Cape
was rounded the fleet encountered terrific storms. The ships were
dispersed by their violence, nor did they sight each other again during
the remainder of the voyage.

Off St. Helena, the voyagers on Varthema’s ship were scared by the
appearance of whales. “We saw two fishes, each as great as a great
house, which, when on the surface, raise a kind of vizor, I should
say of the width of three strides, and let it down when they go under
again. We were so alarmed at the power of these fishes in swimming
that we let off all our artillery.” He next describes the boobies of
Ascension: birds “so simple and foolish that they let themselves be
caught by the hand ... and, before they Were caught, they looked on us
as at a miracle.... On this island are only water and fish and these
birds.” A few days later, they saw the North Star on the horizon. They
touched at the Azores, and at last reached the beautiful estuary of the
Tagus, and anchored off the “noble city of Lisbon.”

And now we find our traveller, of whom it might, by the alteration
of a pronoun be said as of the Egyptian Queen: “Nought could excel
his infinite variety,” turned courtier. Don Emanuel, “the Fortunate,”
was staying at his palace opposite the city, and Varthema crossed the
Tagus to kiss the royal hand. So interesting a traveller with so much
to relate was most graciously received and kept at court for some
days. When he conceived himself to be sufficiently established there,
he seized an opportune moment, presented the patent of Knighthood
which the Viceroy had given him, and asked the monarch to confirm it.
It was his majesty’s pleasure to order a diploma of knighthood to be
drawn up on parchment, and then to sign it with his august hand. This
document was impressed with the royal seal, and Varthema having seen it
registered, took his leave, returned to Italy, and “came to the city of
Rome.”

Julius II. sat on the throne of the Fisherman. That old warrior was
the very man to appreciate the resolution, the resourcefulness, and the
exploit of Varthema. _Papa plusquam Papa_, he had been a mighty man
of valour from his youth upwards; his will of iron was unbroken, and
he retained in full the ardour of earlier years. A man of _virtu_, he
aspired to control and guide the restive Powers of Europe to his own
ends; and to make Rome the centre of the Arts, as well as the political
Mistress of the Western World. If he was Head-bishop of the Western
Church, claiming supreme authority over the Christian world, he was
also a Temporal Prince, a patron of letters and enlightenment. At this
very time, Michael Angelo was busy, by Papal command, adorning the
Sistine Chapel with stupendous fresco and endowing sculpture with all
his own redundant energy and life. Raphael was employed in painting
delicate poems on the walls of the Papal _Stanze_. It was intended
that Rome should become the world’s magnificent capital—a temple to
strike awe and submission into the beholder; its only defect, that
perchance it might shelter an empty shrine. There was as yet little
hint of the terrific revolt of priest and scholar, _lanzknecht_ and
trader, which was preparing beyond the Alps; a revolt which tore away
half the Empire of the Papacy. Little did Theodosius dream of the
overthrow of the sacred city, “urbs æquæva polo,” as Claudian sings by
the barbarians of the North; and as little did Julius deem that it was
destined soon to be sacked by the same rude race. It was nothing to
Julius that Varthema had posed as a renegade: here was a man after his
own heart. Nor were most of the Cardinals indifferent to the discovery
of memorable matters. If an alien faith had been successfully professed
for a laudable purpose so full of commercial possibilities, a few
aves and paternosters, or a slight penance, made amends in that lax
age. Julius gave mandate by word of mouth that Varthema’s account of
his adventures should be duly licensed, and Raphael, Cardinal of St.
George, “Chamberlain of our Most Holy Lord the Pope of the Holy Roman
Church,” “being advised thereto by many other Most Reverend Cardinals
of the Apostolic See,” gave the necessary licence. “Holding the work
worthy, not only of commendation, but of ample reward,” he granted
that the author and his heirs should hold copyright for a space of ten
years. The Cardinal did this on the ground, as he explicitly states
that Varthema had, in his seven years of travel, corrected many of the
errors of ancient geographers, and that the “public use and study” of
his volume would be of service. Such a decision had been impossible
after the Reformation, the Counter-Reformation, and the Council of
Trent. It were hard, even in our days of more single purpose, severely
to censure the sanction to publish the work of a Christian who had
posed as a Mohammedan only to “promote,” as the cardinal says, “such
studies as have always been held in the highest honour.” Varthema had
fully described the products of the East and the localities whence
they came; and such information was not only to the advancement of
knowledge but to the commercial advantage of his time. Had the Papal
Court decided otherwise, the world had lost a priceless record of
virile purpose fulfilled and of remote regions hitherto hardly known or
wholly unknown. The world is indebted to Julius II. and his Cardinals
for their action, whether it be called broad-minded toleration or
latitudinarian indifference. Probably the copyright was no unimportant
matter to the returned wanderer. As has been remarked, we hear nothing
of his having made money by trade in the countries he visited. He was
no vulgar gainer of gold, but one who set out to behold the splendour
of God on the earth and the amazing manners of that prodigy, man. He
dedicated his _Itinerario_ to Agnesina Colonna, a daughter of the
illustrious house of Montefeltro, mother of that Vittoria Colonna whom
Michael Angelo and her own pen have made famous, and the fourth of five
distinguished women in whom learning and ability descended from mother
to daughter. It appeared in 1510.[21] The Dedication informs us that I,
Varthema, “having gone over some parts of the countries and islands of
the east, south and west, am of fixed mind, should it please God, to
make enquiry into those of the north. And so, since I do not perceive
that I am fitted for any other undertaking, to employ what remains to
me of my fleeting days in this honourable task.” Clearly, seven years
of peril by land and sea, the greater part of the time being spent in
tropical heat, had not satiated the curiosity or abated the audacity
of the born-traveller. But no new _Itinerario_ came to tell us of Laps
driving their teams of rein-deer, of the splendours of the Northern
Lights, or of the marvel of the Midnight Sun.

The _Itinerario_ of 1510 was reprinted more than once in Rome, Venice
and Milan during the following fifty years. In 1515 it was translated
into German; in 1520, it appeared in Spanish; in 1556, in French; and
in 1563, in Dutch. In 1577, Richard Eden gave a truncated and corrupt
form of the work, which he had translated from a Latin version into
English. It was incorporated with his “History of Travayle in the
West and East Indies,” and reprinted for private circulation by the
Aungerville Society in 1884. But twenty-one years before this last
date, the Hakluyt Society had printed a translation from the original
Italian edition by the Rev. Geo. Percy Badger. The modern translation
is faithful and eminently readable; Mr. Badger’s annotations are
invaluable; and John Winter Jones supplied a preface which is a
bibliography. But Richard Eden’s imperfect work necessarily conveys
more of the vigorous diction and quaint archaicisms of the original
because the English style of Elizabeth’s time more closely resembled
that of ordinary Italian prose in the days of Julius II. Yet, readable
and delightful as Mr. Badger’s translation is, Varthema remains known
only to the specialized student; to the general reader, together with
many another ancient worthy of heroic mould, he is unknown, even by
name.




FOOTNOTES:

[1] _Mémoires sur les contrées occidentales_, par Hiouen-Thoang, tr. du
chinois par S. Julien, 2 t., 1857–8.

_Si-yu-ki._ Tr. from the Chinese of Hieuen Tsiang by S. Beal. 2 v.
(Trübners Oriental Series) 1884.

_Hist. de la vie de Hiouen Thsang et de ses voyages dans l’Inde_ A.D.
629–45, par Hoei-Li et Yen-Thsong. Tr. du Chinois par S. Julien.
Imprim. Impér. 1853.

_The Life of Hiuen-Tsiang._ Tr. by S. Beal. (Trübner’s Oriental Series)
1878.

The spelling of Oriental names of persons and places varies widely
in English, as well as in other European languages, according to the
system of transliteration employed.

[2] The Author possesses a picture of the source of the Ganges, painted
on panel, on the spot, by the late W. Simpson. Fakirs, at least in his
time, were wont, when the end of life drew near, to ascend the glacier,
and terminate the illusions of existence on the snow-mountains above
it. Simpson saw a Fakir climbing up a snow-slope for this purpose. Now,
as well as one can judge from this panel, the lower end of the glacier
from which the infant Ganges is seen flowing would be about as broad as
Hiuen-Tsiang states the source of the river to be.

[3] Beal’s translation of _Si-yu-ki_ vol. i., p. 70.

[4] J. Talboy Wheeler, “_History of India_,” London, 1874, vol. iii, p.
261.

[5] W. H. Johnson, who was the first European to visit Khotan for 260
years, heard of these cities buried in the sand (1865).

[6] For recent travels in Eastern Turkestan, see Prjevalsky, N. _From
Kulja across the Thian Shan to Lob-Nor_, tr. E. D. Morgan, 1879.

[7] A measure which varies in different provinces. It is the Chinese
foot-measure, always shorter than ours.

[8] The Latin text is printed with a translation by Brownlow, by the
Palestine Pilgrims Text Society. 1892.

[9] _Memoirs of the Emperor Johangueir_, by himself. Tr. from Persian
by D. Price. Oriental Translation Fund. 1829. pp. 96–104.

[10] Chaucer, _Man of Lawe’s Tale. Part I., st. i, l. 4_. The
derivation of Satin is obvious.

[11] Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research, vol. iv. p. 405.

[12] P’u Sung-ling finished his work A.D. 1679, and saw the trick when
he was a boy.

[13] Part of the illusion described by Ibn Batûta, known as the Indian
Rope Trick, was seen by the late Professor Middleton, of the South
Kensington Museum, in Morocco, and is fully described by Wilfred
Scawen Blount’s _Diaries_, 1888–1900, p. 86, sqq. The trick has been
much discussed during the last few years, and conjurers confess that
it perplexes them. (“_Baffled magicians_,” _Times_, Feb. 6th, 1919).
Mr. C. R. Sanderson, Librarian to the National Liberal Club, kindly
drew my attention to certain articles and correspondence in popular
journals (_Strand Magazine_, April, 1919; _Daily Mail_, Jan. 7th, 1913,
and a discussion in the same newspaper, beginning Jan. 8th, 1919, and
ending Feb. 19th, 1919). It is a common belief among English residents
in India that some of these illusions are due to hypnotism; but, as a
rule, only people who are capable of great concentration of mind, or
who are in the habit of obeying commands are readily hypnotized, and
then only by direct suggestion, and not, so say the best authorities,
by will-power. Cases of hypnosis at a distance have been recorded; but
the subjects had already been hypnotized by the operator; and, if these
accounts should be proved veridical, telepathy might possibly explain
them. The instance photographed by Lieut. F. W. Holmes, V.C., is a
degenerate form of the trick. If a cinematograph record of a really
fine exhibition of this illusion could be taken, probably the problem
would be solved conclusively.

[14] A translation of an abbreviated copy of Batûta’s travels was made
by the Revd. S. Lee, and published by the Oriental Translation Fund
in 1829. Since that date the French advance in Algeria led to the
discovery of several copies of the unabridged work; and the “_Voyages
d’Ibn Batoutah_,” translated into French by C. Defrémery and Dr. B.
R. Sanguinette, with the original Arabic text under the translation,
appeared in Paris in 1853, at the hands of the _Société Asiatique_.
There are several examples of the original MS. extant, which slightly
vary from each other, and often differ considerably from the
abbreviation as to matter of fact.

[15] B and V are to be found controvertible both in old Italian and in
old Spanish. Bartema instead of Varthema is on the title page of more
than one edition of the _Itinerario_.

[16] Dante, Inferno, ix, 76, 77.

[17] Varthema gives all the words of the queen in Arabic, phonetically
written, followed by a rendering in Italian. He had learned to speak
Arabic, none too perfectly, but not to write it.

[18]

“High on a throne of royal state, which far Outshone the wealth of
Ormuz and of Ind, Or where the gorgeous East with richest hand Showers
on her kings barbaric pearl and gold, Satan exalted sat.”—_Paradise
Lost_, ii. 1–5.


[19] Giosafat Barbaro & A. Contarini. Travels to Tana and Persia. Tr.
by W. Thomas, Clerk of the Council to Edward VI., and by S. A. Roy.
8vo. 1873.

[20] Should not Varthema have written milk?

[21] A copy, rebound in red velvet, is one of the treasures of the
Library in the British Museum.


THE END.


FOX, JONES & CO., High Street, Oxford, Great Britain. FOOTNOTES:




  TRUBNER’S

  ORIENTAL SERIES

_TRUBNER’S ORIENTAL SERIES_

POPULAR RE-ISSUE AT A UNIFORM PRICE

_Demy 8vo, dark green cloth, gilt._


  ALBERUNI: =India=. An Account of the Religion, Philosophy,
  Literature, Geography, Chronology, Astronomy, Customs, Laws, and
  Astrology of India, about A.D. 1030. BY DR. EDWARD C. SACHAU.

  ARNOLD (Sir E.): =Indian Poetry and Indian Idylls=. Containing
  ‘The Indian Song of Songs,’ from the Sanskrit of the Gita Govinda
  of Jayadeva; Two Books from ‘The Iliad of India’ (Mahabharata):
  ‘Proverbial Wisdom,’ from the Shlokas of the Hitopadesa, and other
  Oriental Poems.

  BARTH (Dr. A.): =The Religions of India=. Authorised Translation by
  Rev. J. WOOD.

  BIGANDET (B. P.): =Life or Legend of Guadama, the Buddha of the
  Burmese=; With Annotations, the Ways to Neibban, and Notice on the
  Phongyies or Burmese Monks.

  BEAL (Prof. S.): =Life of Hiuen-Tsiang=. By the Shamans HWUI LI and
  YEN-TSUNG. With a Preface containing an Account of the Works of
  I-Tsing.

  BEAL (Prof. S.): =Si-Yu-Ki=: Buddhist Records of the Western World.
  Translated from the Chinese of Hiuen-Tsiang.

  COWELL (Prof. E. B.): =Sarva-Darsana-Samgraha=; or, Review of the
  Different Systems of Hindu Philosophy. BY MADHAVA ACHARYA. Translated
  by Prof. E. B. COWELL, M.A., and Prof. A. E. GOUGH, M.A.

  DOWSON (Prof. J.): =Classical Dictionary of Hindu Mythology and
  Religion, Geography, History, and Literature=.

  EDKINS (Dr. J.): =Chinese Buddhism=: A Volume of Sketches, Historical
  and Critical. New and Revised Edition.

  ROCKHILL (W. W.): =The Life of the Buddha and the Early History
  of his Order=. Derived from Tibetan works in the Bkah-hgyur and
  Bstan-hgyur. Followed by notices on the early history of Tibet and
  Khoten.

  HAUG (Dr. M.): =Essays on the Sacred Language, Writings, and Religion
  of the Parsis=.

  WEBER (Dr. A.): =History of Indian Literature=. Translated by JOHN
  MANN, M.A., and THEODORE ZACHARIAE, Ph.D. Fourth Edition.

  _Other Volumes to follow._

  LONDON

  KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRUBNER & CO., LTD.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FOUR PILGRIMS***


******* This file should be named 63894-0.txt or 63894-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/6/3/8/9/63894


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org 

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary 
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg EBook of The idiots, by Joseph  Conrad

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this ebook.

Title: The idiots
       Gli Idioti

Author: Joseph  Conrad

Translator: Hilda  Campioni

Release Date: November 27, 2020 [EBook #63893]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Image source(s): https://archive.org/details/idiotsconrad00conruoft

Produced by: Richard Tonsing and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team
             at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
             generously made available by The Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE IDIOTS ***

   This ebook (originally published in 1920) was created in honour of
               Distributed Proofreaders 20th Anniversary.




                            Italian—English




                             JOSEPH CONRAD

                               GLI IDIOTI

                               THE IDIOTS




           Serie Bilingue           │         Bilingual Series
                                    │
      DIRETTORE: J. E. MANSION      │   GENERAL EDITOR: J. E. MANSION
 ───────────────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────────────
                                    │
                                    │
                                    │
                                    │
             GLI IDIOTI             │            THE IDIOTS
                                    │
                                    │
                 DI                 │                BY
            JOSEPH CONRAD           │           JOSEPH CONRAD
                                    │
            TRADUZIONE DI           │
           HILDA CAMPIONI           │
                                    │
                                    │
      LONDRA          NUOVA-YORK    │     LONDON           NEW YORK
 GEORGE G. HARRAP     BRENTANO’S    │GEORGE G. HARRAP     BRENTANO’S
  & COMPANY LTD.   PUBLISHERS: FIFTH│ & COMPANY LTD.   PUBLISHERS: FIFTH
                        AVENUE      │                       AVENUE
 PORTSMOUTH STREET   & 27TH STREET  │PORTSMOUTH STREET   & 27TH STREET
     KINGSWAY                       │    KINGSWAY
 SYDNEY: THE AUSTRALASIAN PUBLISHING│SYDNEY: THE AUSTRALASIAN PUBLISHING
            COMPANY LTD.            │           COMPANY LTD.




                                CONTENTS


                                   I
                                   II
                                  III
                                   IV




             PREFAZIONE             │              PREFACE
                                    │
                                    │
 Siamo all’inizio di un’era nuova,  │We are at the beginning of a new
 la cui principale caratteristica   │era which will be marked by a
 sarà, speriamo, una maggiore       │greater fraternization between
 fratellanza tra i popoli. Il       │nations. The need to know and
 bisogno di conoscerci a vicenda    │understand one another will be felt
 sarà sempre più sentito. Ne        │more and more. It follows that the
 consegue, che lo studio delle      │study of foreign languages is
 lingue straniere assume oggi       │assuming to-day a capital
 un’importanza capitale.            │importance.
                                    │
 Tutti coloro che desiderino        │All those who wish to make
 famigliarizzarsi con l’idioma dei  │acquaintance with the speech of
 loro vicini, o che abbiano in parte│their neighbours, or who have
 dimenticate le prime cognizioni già│allowed their former knowledge to
 da tempo acquisite, faranno buona  │grow rusty, will welcome this
 accoglienza a questa serie di      │series of texts, which will enable
 opuscoli che li metterà in grado di│them, independently of bulky
 dedicarsi allo studio delle lingue │dictionaries, to devote to language
 in momenti d’ozio che loro offre il│study the moments of leisure which
 corso della giornata,              │offer themselves in the course of
 indipendentemente dall’uso di      │the day.
 voluminosi dizionari.              │
                                    │
 I testi sono stati scelti col      │The texts have been selected from
 doppio punto di vista del loro     │the double point of view of their
 valore letterario e dell’utilità   │literary worth and of the
 dei vocaboli; così pure nella      │usefulness of their vocabulary; in
 traduzione s’è cercato di          │the translations, also, the
 raggiungere l’intento di accoppiare│endeavour has been to unite
 alla distinzione dello stile la più│qualities of style with strict
 scrupolosa fedeltà all’originale.  │fidelity to the original.




            INTRODUZIONE            │           INTRODUCTION
                                    │
                                    │
 Nella _Revue des Deux Mondes_      │In the _Revue des Deux Mondes_ of
 dell’ottobre 1919 L. Gillet, in suo│October 1st, 1919, Mr L. Gillet, in
 apprezzamento su _La Freccia d’Oro_│the course of an appreciation of Mr
 (_The Arrow of Gold_) di Joseph    │Joseph Conrad’s _Arrow of Gold_,
 Conrad, scrive quanto segue:       │writes as follows:
                                    │
 “Ciò che è originale e             │“What is original and
 caratteristico nell’autore di      │characteristic in the author of the
 _Anime Inquiete_ (_Tales of        │_Tales of Unrest_, what constitutes
 Unrest_), ciò che costituisce la   │the permanent basis of his art,
 base permanente della sua arte e a │what we are always brought back to,
 cui sempre ritorniamo, discutendo  │when he is under discussion, is the
 su lui, è il senso del mistero.    │sense of mystery.
                                    │
 “I suoi personaggi, sebbene        │“His characters, though quivering
 vibranti di vita, noi abbiamo quasi│with life, nearly always give us
 sempre l’impressione di conoscerli │the impression that they are only
 solo a metà: ogni tanto essi ci    │half known to us; now and again
 sorprendono con gesti o sentimenti │they surprise us by gestures,
 del tutto in disaccordo colla loro │feelings, which do not agree with
 personalità a noi nota, come se un │what we know of their personality:
 secondo carattere, a loro stessi   │it is as though a second character,
 sconosciuto, agisse improvvisamente│unknown to themselves, suddenly
 in loro vece, come se nel bel mezzo│acted in their stead; as though in
 d’un dramma il suggeritore fosse   │the middle of a play the prompter
 mosso improvvisamente a modificarne│were suddenly moved to modify the
 il testo e alterarne le parti. C’è │text and to alter the parts. There
 sempre negli eroi di Conrad un     │is always, in Mr Conrad’s heroes, a
 segreto di cui la chiave non è a   │secret, the key to which is
 portata della nostra mano. Vanno e │withheld from us; they come and go,
 vengono, e a un tratto una forza   │and suddenly a power different from
 diversa da loro prende il loro     │themselves takes their place, and
 posto, e fa loro commettere azioni │makes them commit strange and
 strane e impreviste.               │unlooked-for actions....
                                    │
 “Questi esseri, quasi sempre       │“Those beings, nearly always
 ammirabili per la loro energia,    │admirable by their energy,
 rappresentano la lotta fra una     │represent the struggle of a heroic
 volontà eroica e una forza oscura e│will against an obscure and
 indefinita, la quale è la forza    │undefinable power, which is that of
 della vita, forza che in un attimo,│life, and which in a moment, like a
 come un fiotto di mare, leva loro i│ground-swell, lifts them off their
 piedi di sotto, li rovina e        │feet, ruins and destroys them,
 distrugge, li stracca vinti, come  │leaves them vanquished, like
 resti di un naufragio.”            │flotsam after a shipwreck.”
                                    │
 Sarebbe difficile dare di _Anime   │It would be difficult to give of
 inquiete_, e più particolarmente   │the _Tales of Unrest_, and more
 della novella che Conrad           │particularly of the story which Mr
 cortesemente ci ha permesso        │Conrad has kindly allowed us to
 estrarre da quel volume, più       │take from that volume, a more
 acconcio apprezzamento.            │fitting appreciation.
                                    │
 La novella non è giocosa, ma Conrad│The story is not a hilarious one,
 non è scrittore giocoso; l’opera   │but Mr Conrad is not a hilarious
 sua ha altre caratteristiche, che  │writer; his work has other
 H. Taine si sarebbe compiaciuto di │characteristics, which H. Taine
 spiegarci come dovute “alla        │would have delighted in explaining
 razza,[1] all’ambiente, al         │to us as due to “the race,[2] the
 momento.”                          │environment, and the moment.”
                                    │
 Perchè Conrad è di origine polacca │For Mr Conrad is of Polish
 e passò a Varsavia la sua prima    │extraction, and at Warsaw his early
 gioventù framezzo ai moti politici │youth was spent amid political
 che culminarono nella ribellione   │unrest which culminated in the
 del 1862, e che travolse fra i     │rebellion of 1862, and of which the
 primi i suoi genitori. Questi,     │foremost victims were his parents.
 fisicamente affranti dalla         │The latter, physically broken by
 prigionia e dall’esilio, furono    │imprisonment and exile, were no
 senza dubbio i primi esempi pel    │doubt the future writer’s first
 futuro scrittore di quei tragici   │examples of those tragic heroes,
 eroi, lottanti cupamente e pur     │struggling gloomily yet bravely
 coraggiosamente col Fato, ch’egli  │against Fate, which he was to
 doveva così spesso dipingerci negli│depict so often in later years.
 anni avvenire.                     │
                                    │
 Inoltre il padre di Conrad fu uomo │Mr Conrad’s father, moreover, was a
 dotto, traduttore di Shakespeare,  │gifted scholar, a translator of
 di Victor Hugo, di Alfred de Vigny,│Shakespeare, of Victor Hugo, of
 con una propensione speciale per   │Alfred de Vigny, with a special
 l’autore di _Chatterton_ e della   │fondness for the author of
 _Morte del Lupo_. Così le tendenze │_Chatterton_ and of _The Death of
 letterarie del figlio verrebbero   │the Wolf_. Thus the literary
 notevolmente ad appoggiare la      │tendencies of the son would appear
 teoria dell’ereditarietà.          │to afford a striking instance of
                                    │heredity.
                                    │
 Perduti i genitori all’età di      │Having lost his parents before the
 dodici anni, Conrad rimase sotto la│age of twelve, Mr Conrad came under
 tutela dello zio, ricco            │the care of his uncle, a large
 proprietario. Tre o quattr’anni    │estate-owner. Three or four years
 dopo egli espresse la sua          │later he expressed a wish to go to
 aspirazione di andare in mare,     │sea, a wish which Taine would have
 aspirazione di cui Taine sarebbe   │been somewhat puzzled to account
 stato imbarazzato rintracciarne le │for, and which indeed shocked all
 origini, e che invero sgomentò     │the family, his uncle alone
 tutta la famiglia, eccetto suo zio.│excepted. The latter thought it
 Egli trovò prudente di non         │wise to withhold his consent for a
 accordare subito il suo consenso,  │few months, but granted it as soon
 ma lo diede qualche mese dopo,     │as he was convinced that this was
 quando si convinse che questo non  │no passing fancy, and the young man
 era un capriccio di passaggio, ed  │departed for Marseilles, where some
 il giovanetto partì per Marsiglia, │friends were ready to give him a
 dove degli amici erano disposti ad │start in the mercantile marine.
 avviarlo nella marina mercantile.  │
                                    │
 Ma Conrad ci racconta anche questo │Mr Conrad has told us this other
 fatto, un po’ strano, ch’egli aveva│singular fact that he had already
 già dapprima deciso di cercare la  │decided to seek his fortune in the
 sua fortuna nella marina inglese.  │British service. From Marseilles he
 Infatti egli venne ben presto da   │soon came to London, then ‘served
 Marsiglia a Londra, e, finito      │his time’ in the usual way, sailed
 l’usato tirocinio, fece vela per   │for many years to the Far East,
 l’Estremo Oriente, ove restò       │visited every nook of the Malay
 parecchi anni, visitò in lungo e in│Archipelago, and took his captain’s
 largo l’Arcipelago della Malesia, e│certificate in 1884.
 prese il diploma di capitano nel   │
 1884.                              │
                                    │
 Fin’allora egli s’era dato poca    │Until that time he had, it would
 cura, si direbbe almeno, della     │appear, little thought of
 letteratura. Tuttavia sei anni dopo│literature. Yet six years later he
 egli portava con sè in giro certo  │was carrying about with him a
 manoscritto, scritto nella lingua  │certain manuscript, written in the
 della sua patria adottiva,         │tongue of his adopted country,
 cominciato con difficoltà,         │begun with difficulty, continued
 continuato a fatica riga per riga, │“line by line,” often neglected for
 negletto spesso per mesi e mesi,   │months at a time, lugged about from
 trascicato a zonzo dai Mari della  │the China Seas to the Ukraine, and
 Cina all’Ucraina, le cui           │the vicissitudes of which have been
 vicissitudini ci sono in parte     │partly disclosed to us by the
 rivelate dall’autore nei suoi      │author in _A Personal Record_.
 _Ricordi Autobiografici_ (_A       │
 Personal Record_).                 │
                                    │
 Questo manoscritto, _La Pazzia di  │This MS., _Almayer’s Folly_, at
 Almayer_ (_Almayer’s Folly_), fu   │last saw the light of day in 1895.
 pubblicato nel 1895. Conrad s’era  │Mr Conrad had entered upon a new
 avviato per una nuova carriera:    │career and given himself up
 egli era ormai definitivamente     │definitely to writing. In a very
 scrittore. Da allora, in un tempo  │short space of time, with his novel
 assai breve, col suo romanzo _Il   │_The Nigger of the Narcissus_
 Negro del Narciso_ (_The Nigger of │(1897) and the _Tales of Unrest_
 the Narcissus_) (1897) e con _Anime│(1898), he achieved a fame which
 Inquiete_ (_Tales of Unrest_)      │had soon spread beyond his adoptive
 (1898), egli acquistò una fama che │country.
 si sparse ben presto fuor dei      │
 confini della sua patria adottiva. │
                                    │
 Fra le molte opere che seguirono   │Among the numerous volumes which
 possiamo nominare: _Gioventù ed    │followed, we may mention: _Youth,
 altri Racconti_ (_Youth and Other  │and other Tales_, partly
 Tales_) in parte autobiografici;   │autobiographical; _Typhoon_;
 _Tifone_ (_Typhoon_); _Nostromo_;  │_Nostromo_; _The Mirror of the
 _Lo Specchio del Mare_ (_The Mirror│Sea_; _The Secret Agent_; _’Twixt
 of the Sea_); _L’Agente Segreto_   │Land and Sea_; _Chance_; and the
 (_The Secret Agent_); _Fra Terra e │recent story, which will certainly
 Mare_ (_’Twixt Land and Sea_);     │stand conspicuous among his works:
 _Fortuna_ (_Chance_); e l’ultima   │_The Arrow of Gold_.
 novella, che già eccelle fra i suoi│
 lavori: _La Freccia d’Oro_ (_The   │
 Arrow of Gold_).                   │
                                    │
 Nel breve racconto che segue, le   │In the short tale which follows the
 qualità dominanti dell’autore sono │dominant qualities of the author
 facilmente riconoscibili: esatta   │are easily recognizable: exact
 osservazione e scelta sicura delle │observation and unerring choice of
 linee essenziali nella             │the essential feature in the
 presentazione di personaggi e di   │presentation of characters and of
 fatti, unitamente a una selezione  │facts, together with rigorous
 rigorosa dell’ esatta parola: in   │selection of the ‘right word’: in
 breve la tecnica impeccabile di    │short, the faultless technique of
 Flaubert e di Maupassant; poi, un  │Flaubert and of Maupassant; then, a
 profondo senso del mistero nel     │deep sense of the mystery in which
 quale è avvolta l’anima umana, ed  │the human soul is wrapped; lastly,
 infine quel gran soffio tragico che│that great breath of tragedy which
 ispirò Eschilo e Sofocle, e che,   │inspired Æschylus and Sophocles,
 fino alla comparsa di Conrad, non  │and which, until the advent of Mr
 era ancora apparso nella           │Conrad, had remained foreign to
 letteratura moderna.               │modern literature.
                                    │
                                    │                           J. E. M.




             GLI IDIOTI             │            THE IDIOTS




                                   I


 Percorrevamo in carrozza la strada │We were driving along the road from
 che va da Tréguier a Kervanda.     │Tréguier to Kervanda. We passed at
 Passavamo ad un trotto serrato fra │a smart trot between the hedges
 le siepi alzate sui ripari di terra│topping an earth wall on each side
 che fiancheggiavano la strada,     │of the road; then at the foot of
 quando, al piede della ripida      │the steep ascent before Ploumar[4]
 ascesa che precede Ploumar,[3] il  │the horse dropped into a walk, and
 cavallo si mise spontaneamente al  │the driver jumped down heavily from
 passo, mentre il cocchiere saltava │the box.
 da cassetta pesantemente a terra.  │
                                    │
 Egli fece scoppiettare la frusta e │He flicked his whip and climbed the
 s’inerpicò sul pendio, salendo     │incline, stepping clumsily uphill
 grevemente il colle a fianco del   │by the side of the carriage, one
 veicolo, la mano sul predellino e  │hand on the footboard, his eyes on
 l’occhio a terra.                  │the ground.

 Dopo un certo tempo alzò la testa, │After a while he lifted his head,
 indicò avanti a lui la strada colla│pointed up the road with the end of
 punta della sua frusta e disse:    │the whip, and said:
                                    │
 L’idiota!                          │“The idiot!”
                                    │
 Il sole abbruciava l’ondeggiante   │The sun was shining violently upon
 distesa della campagna. I rilievi  │the undulating surface of the land.
 del terreno erano coronati da      │The rises were topped by clumps of
 ciuffi di alberi scarni, coi rami  │meagre trees, with their branches
 tesi così alti nel cielo come se ne│showing high on the sky as if they
 stessero lì appollaiati su         │had been perched upon stilts. The
 trampoli. I campicelli, tagliati da│small fields, cut up by hedges and
 siepi e da muriccioli che          │stone walls that zigzagged over the
 serpeggiavano su pei pendii, si    │slopes, lay in rectangular patches
 disponevano in chiazze rettangolari│of vivid greens and yellows,
 di verde vivido e di giallo, come  │resembling the unskilful daubs of a
 in un imbratto d’inesperto         │naïve picture.
 tentativo pittorico.               │
                                    │
 E il paesaggio era diviso in due   │And the landscape was divided in
 dalla striscia bianca di una       │two by the white streak of a road
 strada, perdentesi in lunghe volute│stretching in long loops far away,
 lontano, come un fiume di polvere  │like a river of dust crawling out
 strisciante giù dai colli verso il │of the hills on its way to the sea.
 mare.                              │
                                    │
 Eccolo! disse il cocchiere di      │“Here he is,” said the driver,
 nuovo.                             │again.
                                    │
 Tra l’erba alta del ciglione, passò│In the long grass bordering the
 di sfuggita una faccia a fianco    │road a face glided past the
 della carrozza all’altezza delle   │carriage at the level of the wheels
 ruote, mentre noi in essa          │as we drove slowly by. The imbecile
 lentamente salivamo. La faccia     │face was red, and the bullet head
 scema era rossa, e la pallottola   │with close-cropped hair seemed to
 del capo, con brevi capelli        │lie alone, its chin in the dust.
 smozzicati, sembrava sola giacere, │The body was lost in the bushes
 col mento nella polvere. Il corpo  │growing thick along the bottom of
 era perduto tra i cespugli che     │the deep ditch.
 crescevano fitti, giù nel profondo │
 fossato.                           │
                                    │
 Era una faccia di ragazzo. Avrebbe │It was a boy’s face. He might have
 potuto avere sedici anni a         │been sixteen, judging from the
 giudicare dalla grandezza—forse    │size—perhaps less, perhaps more.
 meno, forse più.                   │
                                    │
 Tali creature vengono dimenticate  │Such creatures are forgotten by
 dal tempo, e vivono non tocche     │time, and live untouched by years
 dagli anni, finchè la morte li     │till death gathers them up into its
 stringa al suo petto               │compassionate bosom; the faithful
 compassionevole: la morte fedele,  │death that never forgets in the
 che mai dimentica, nell’incalzare  │press of work the most
 del suo lavoro, il più             │insignificant of its children.
 insignificante dei suoi figlioli.  │
                                    │
 Ah! eccone un altro! disse l’uomo, │“Ah! there’s another,” said the
 con una certa soddisfazione nella  │man, with a certain satisfaction in
 voce, come avvistando qualche cosa │his tone, as if he had caught sight
 di atteso.                         │of something expected.
                                    │
 Ce n’era un altro. Questo stava    │There was another. That one stood
 quasi nel mezzo della strada nella │nearly in the middle of the road in
 vampa del sole, all’estremità della│the blaze of sunshine at the end of
 breve ombra ch’egli stesso         │his own short shadow. And he stood
 proiettava. E stava con le mani    │with hands pushed into the opposite
 conficcate nelle opposte maniche   │sleeves of his long coat, his head
 della sua lunga veste, la testa    │sunk between the shoulders, all
 incassata nelle spalle, tutto      │hunched up in the flood of heat.
 raggomitolato in sè stesso in quel │
 flusso di canicola.                │
                                    │
 Da lontano aveva l’aspetto di      │From a distance he had the aspect
 qualcuno intirizzito da un intenso │of one suffering from intense cold.
 freddo.                            │
                                    │
 Questi due son gemelli, spiegò il  │“Those are twins,” explained the
 cocchiere.                         │driver.
                                    │
 L’idiota si trascicò due passi     │The idiot shuffled two paces out of
 addietro e ci guardò per di sopra  │the way and looked at us over his
 la spalla mentre passavamo         │shoulder when we brushed past him.
 strusciando da presso. Lo sguardo  │The glance was unseeing and
 era vacuo e fisso, uno sguardo     │staring, a fascinated glance; but
 incantato; ma non si voltò a       │he did not turn to look after us.
 guardarci dietro. Probabilmente    │Probably the image passed before
 l’immagine passò davanti agli      │the eyes without leaving any trace
 occhi, senza lasciar traccia nel   │on the misshapen brain of the
 deforme cervello della creatura.   │creature.
                                    │
 Arrivati al sommo della salita,    │When we had topped the ascent I
 guardai al disopra del mantice.    │looked over the hood. He stood in
 Egli era nella strada tal’ e quale │the road just where we had left
 dove l’avevamo lasciato.           │him.
                                    │
 Il cocchiere s’aggrappò per        │The driver clambered into his seat,
 riprendere il suo sedile, fece     │clicked his tongue, and we went
 schioccare la lingua, e scendemmo  │down hill. The brake squeaked
 il colle. Il freno strideva        │horribly from time to time. At the
 orribilmente di tanto in tanto. Al │foot he eased off the noisy
 piede della collina egli allentò il│mechanism and said, turning half
 rumoroso meccanismo, e disse,      │round on his box:
 voltandosi a mezzo sul suo sedile: │
                                    │
 Ne vedremo degli altri fra poco.   │“We shall see some more of them by
                                    │and by.”
                                    │
 Altri idioti? Quanti ce ne sono    │“More idiots? How many of them are
 allora? domandai.                  │there, then?” I asked.
                                    │
 Ce ne sono quattro, figli di un    │“There’s four of them—children of a
 contadino qui vicino a Ploumar...  │farmer near Ploumar here....
                                    │
 I genitori sono morti ora, egli    │“The parents are dead now,” he
 aggiunse dopo alquanto tempo. La   │added, after a while. “The
 nonna vive alla masseria. Durante  │grandmother lives on the farm. In
 il giorno essi ciondolano per      │the daytime they knock about on
 questa strada, e rincasano al      │this road, and they come home at
 crepuscolo, assieme al bestiame... │dusk along with the cattle.... It’s
 È un ricco podere!                 │a good farm.”
                                    │
 Vedemmo gli altri due: un ragazzo e│We saw the other two: a boy and a
 una ragazzetta, come disse il      │girl, as the driver said. They were
 vetturino. Essi erano vestiti      │dressed exactly alike, in shapeless
 esattamente identici, in un informe│garments with petticoat-like
 abbigliamento con una specie di    │skirts.
 gonnella.                          │
                                    │
 Lo storpio essere che viveva dentro│The imperfect thing that lived
 a loro mosse quelle creature a     │within them moved those beings to
 berciare dietro a noi dal sommo del│howl at us from the top of the
 cigliare dove essi giacevano, fra  │bank, where they sprawled amongst
 gli steli flessibili del           │the tough stalks of furze.
 ginestrone.                        │
                                    │
 Le loro teste nere tosate          │Their cropped black heads stuck out
 sporgevano fuori dalla gialla      │from the bright yellow wall of
 parete smagliante fatta dagli      │countless small blossoms. The faces
 innumeri fiorellini. Le faccie     │were purple with the strain of
 erano imporporate dallo sforzo     │yelling; the voices sounded blank
 degli strilli; le voci suonavano   │and cracked like a mechanical
 vuote e fesse, come di un congegno │imitation of old people’s voices;
 che imitasse una voce di vecchio; e│and suddenly ceased when we turned
 cessarono subito quando noi        │into a lane.
 svoltammo in un sentiero.          │
                                    │
 Li rividi molte volte nel mio      │I saw them many times in my
 vagabondare per la campagna. Essi  │wandering about the country. They
 vivevano su quella strada,         │lived on that road, drifting along
 accoccolandosi lunghessa, più in su│its length here and there,
 o più in giù, secondo gli          │according to the inexplicable
 inesplicabili impulsi della loro   │impulses of their monstrous
 tenebra mostruosa.                 │darkness.
                                    │
 Essi erano un’offesa alla luce del │They were an offence to the
 sole, un rimprovero alla vanità del│sunshine, a reproach to empty
 cielo, un offuscamento al vigore   │heaven, a blight on the
 denso e concentrato del paesaggio  │concentrated and purposeful vigour
 selvaggio.                         │of the wild landscape.
                                    │
 Col tempo la storia dei loro       │In time the story of their parents
 genitori prese contorno ai miei    │shaped itself before me out of the
 occhi, fuor dalle mozze risposte   │listless answers to my questions,
 alle mie domande, fuor dalle       │out of the indifferent words heard
 indifferenti parole udite alle     │in wayside inns or on the very road
 bettole che fiancheggiavano la via │those idiots haunted.
 o sulla strada bazzicata da quegli │
 idioti.                            │
                                    │
 Parte me ne fu detta da un vecchio,│Some of it was told by an emaciated
 scettico ed emaciato, munito di una│and sceptical old fellow with a
 terribile frusta, mentre           │tremendous whip, while we trudged
 faticosamente procedevamo insieme  │together over the sands by the side
 sulle dune, a fianco di un carro a │of a two-wheeled cart loaded with
 due ruote carico d’alghe           │dripping seaweed.[6]
 gocciolanti.[5]                    │
                                    │
 Poi, altra volta, altra gente mi   │Then at other times other people
 confermò e completò la storia:     │confirmed and completed the story:
 finchè alla fine me la vidi tutta  │till it stood at last before me, a
 dinanzi, formidabile e semplice a  │tale formidable and simple, as they
 un tempo, come si palesano sempre  │always are, those disclosures of
 queste rivelazioni di oscure prove,│obscure trials endured by ignorant
 passate attraverso il cuore degli  │hearts.
 umili.                             │




                                   II


 Quando tornò dal suo servizio      │When he returned from his military
 militare, Jean-Pierre Bacadou trovò│service Jean-Pierre Bacadou found
 i suoi vecchi assai decadenti.     │the old people very much aged. He
 Osservò con dolore che il lavoro   │remarked with pain that the work of
 della terra non era fatto a dovere:│the farm was not satisfactorily
 il padre non aveva l’energia dei   │done. The father had not the energy
 tempi andati, le opre non sentivano│of old days. The hands did not feel
 sopra di sè l’occhio del padrone.  │over them the eye of the master.
                                    │
 Jean-Pierre notò con pena che il   │Jean-Pierre noted with sorrow that
 mucchio del letame nel cortile,    │the heap of manure in the courtyard
 davanti all’unico ingresso di casa,│before the only entrance to the
 non era colmo quanto avrebbe dovuto│house was not so large as it should
 essere, le chiuse erano così       │have been. The fences were out of
 malandate da abbisognare di        │repair, and the cattle suffered
 riparazioni e il bestiame soffriva │from neglect.
 d’esser negletto.                  │
                                    │
 A casa, la madre era quasi         │At home the mother was practically
 definitivamente allettata, e le    │bedridden and the girls chattered
 donne facevano schiamazzo nella    │loudly in the big kitchen
 vasta cucina, senza che nessuno le │unrebuked, from morning to night.
 riprendesse, dalla mattina alla    │
 sera.                              │
                                    │
 Egli disse fra sè:                 │He said to himself:
                                    │
 Tutto ciò cambierà!                │“We must change all this.”
                                    │
 Ne parlò al padre una sera, quando │He talked the matter over with his
 i raggi del sole al tramonto,      │father one evening when the rays of
 entrando nel cortile fra le varie  │the setting sun entering the yard
 adiacenze, rigavano le grevi ombre │between the outhouses ruled the
 di striscie luminose. Sul letamaio │heavy shadows with luminous
 si moveva una nebbia leggera di    │streaks. Over the manure heap
 colore opalino e carica di         │floated a mist, opal-tinted and
 esalazioni, e le galline in giro a │odorous, and the marauding hens
 far sacco avevano sospeso di       │would stop in their scratching to
 razzolare, per scrutare con un     │examine with a sudden glance of
 subito sguardo del loro occhio     │their round eye the two men, both
 rotondo i due uomini, entrambi alti│lean and tall, talking in hoarse
 ed asciutti, discorrenti con       │tones.
 intonazioni rauche.                │
                                    │
 Il vecchio, rattratto dal          │The old man, all twisted with
 reumatismo e curvo dagli anni e dal│rheumatism and bowed with years of
 lavoro, il giovane ossuto ed       │work, the younger bony and
 eretto, parlavano senza gesti, con │straight, spoke without gestures in
 quell’indifferenza propria dei     │the indifferent manner of peasants,
 contadini, ch’è lenta e grave ad un│grave and slow. But before the sun
 tempo. Ma prima che il sole fosse  │had set the father had submitted to
 tramontato, il padre aveva ceduto  │the sensible arguments of the son.
 agli argomenti ragionevoli del     │
 figliolo.                          │
                                    │
 Non è per me che io parlo!         │“It is not for me that I am
 insisteva Jean-Pierre. È per la    │speaking,” insisted Jean-Pierre.
 nostra terra. È un peccato il      │“It is for the land. It’s a pity to
 trarne così poco vantaggio. Per me │see it badly used. I am not
 non ho fretta...                   │impatient for myself.”
                                    │
 Il vecchio tentennò il capo chino  │The old fellow nodded over his
 sul suo bastone.                   │stick.
                                    │
 Forse; forse... egli borbottò. Puoi│“I dare say; I dare say,” he
 aver ragione. Fa come ti pare. È la│muttered. “You may be right. Do
 mamma che sarà contenta!           │what you like. It’s the mother that
                                    │will be pleased.”
                                    │
 La madre fu soddisfatta della      │The mother was pleased with her
 nuora. Jean-Pierre fece entrare di │daughter-in-law. Jean-Pierre
 volata il baroccio nel cortile. Il │brought the two-wheeled spring-cart
 cavallo grigio galoppò             │with a rush into the yard. The grey
 pesantemente, e gli sposi, seduti  │horse galloped clumsily, and the
 l’uno a fianco dell’altro,         │bride and bridegroom, sitting side
 sobbalzarono periodicamente e      │by side, were jerked backwards and
 bruscamente avanti e indietro nel  │forwards by the up and down motion
 movimento alterno delle stanghe.   │of the shafts, in a manner regular
                                    │and brusque.
                                    │
 Sulla strada il corteo nuziale,    │On the road the distanced wedding
 rimasto distanziato, procedeva     │guests straggled in pairs and
 sbandato, a coppie ed a gruppi. Gli│groups. The men advanced with heavy
 uomini avanzavano a passi pesanti, │steps, swinging their idle arms.
 ciondolando le loro braccia oziose.│They were clad in town clothes;
 Erano abbigliati in vesti          │jackets cut with clumsy smartness,
 cittadine: giacche tagliate con    │hard black hats, immense boots,
 rozza pretensione, cappelli neri   │polished highly.
 duri, stivali enormi fatti lucidi  │
 come specchi.                      │
                                    │
 Le loro donne, tutte semplicemente │Their women all in simple black,
 in nero, con cuffie bianche e      │with white caps and shawls of faded
 scialli a tinte smorte piegati a   │tints folded triangularly on the
 triangolo sulle spalle,            │back, strolled lightly by their
 trotterellavano a passo leggero ai │side.
 loro fianchi.                      │
                                    │
 In testa un violino gemeva un’aria │In front the violin sang a strident
 stridente e una cornamusa[7]       │tune, and the biniou[8] snored and
 russava e rombava, mentre il       │hummed, while the player capered
 suonatore avanzava danzando        │solemnly, lifting high his heavy
 solennemente in cadenza, levando   │clogs.
 alti i suoi pesanti zoccoli.       │
                                    │
 L’oscura processione si sospingeva │The sombre procession drifted in
 dentro e fuori agli stretti        │and out of the narrow lanes,
 viottoli, traverso il sole e       │through sunshine and through shade,
 traverso l’ombra, fra i campi e le │between fields and hedgerows,
 siepi e i filari degli alberi,     │scaring the little birds that
 spaurendo gli uccellini, che si    │darted away in troops right and
 precipitavano via a stormi a destra│left. In the yard of Bacadou’s farm
 e a sinistra. Nell’aia dei Bacadou │the dark ribbon wound itself up
 il nastro nero si avvolse in un    │into a mass of men and women
 viluppo solo di uomini e di donne, │pushing at the door with cries and
 accalcatisi alla porta con grida e │greetings.
 felicitazioni.                     │
                                    │
 Il pranzo di nozze si ricordò per  │The wedding dinner was remembered
 mesi e mesi. Fu un festino coi     │for months. It was a splendid feast
 fiocchi, nel frutteto. Contadini   │in the orchard. Farmers of
 notoriamente facoltosi e d’ottima  │considerable means and excellent
 riputazione si continuarono a      │repute were to be found sleeping in
 trovare addormentati per le fosse, │ditches, all along the road to
 tutto lungo la strada fino a       │Tréguier, even as late as the
 Tréguier, ancora nel pomeriggio del│afternoon of the next day. All the
 giorno successivo. Tutto il contado│country-side participated in the
 partecipò alla felicità di         │happiness of Jean-Pierre.
 Jean-Pierre.                       │
                                    │
 Egli rimase sobrio, e, assieme alla│He remained sober, and, together
 sua quieta sposa, si tenne in      │with his quiet wife, kept out of
 disparte, lasciando padre e madre  │the way, letting father and mother
 raccogliere le loro spettanze di   │reap their due of honour and
 onori e di ringraziamenti.         │thanks.
                                    │
 Ma il giorno dopo egli prese       │But the next day he took hold
 fermamente le redini, e i vecchi   │strongly, and the old folks felt a
 sentirono un’ombra—annunciatrice   │shadow—precursor of the grave—fall
 della tomba—cadere definitivamente │upon them finally. The world is to
 su loro. Il mondo è per la         │the young.
 gioventù!                          │
                                    │
 Quando nacquero i gemelli, lo      │When the twins were born there was
 spazio non fece difetto nella casa,│plenty of room in the house, for
 perchè la madre di Jean-Pierre se  │the mother of Jean-Pierre had gone
 ne era andata a riposare sotto una │away to dwell under a heavy stone
 pesante pietra nel cimitero di     │in the cemetery of Ploumar.
 Ploumar.                           │
                                    │
 Quel giorno, per la prima volta dal│On that day, for the first time
 matrimonio del figlio, il vecchio  │since his son’s marriage, the elder
 Bacadou, trascurato dal gruppo     │Bacadou, neglected by the cackling
 crocchiante di donne forestiere che│lot of strange women who thronged
 affollavano la cucina, lasciò al   │the kitchen, left in the morning
 mattino il suo sedile sotto la     │his seat under the mantel of the
 cappa del camino, ed andò nella    │fire-place, and went into the empty
 stalla vuota, scuotendo tristemente│cow-house, shaking his white locks
 le sue bianche ciocche...          │dismally.
                                    │
 Va bene i nepoti, ma lui voleva la │Grandsons were all very well, but
 sua minestra a mezzogiorno!        │he wanted his soup at midday.
                                    │
 Quando gli mostrarono i neonati, li│When shown the babies, he stared at
 guardò a lungo con uno sguardo     │them with a fixed gaze, and
 fisso, e borbottò qualche cosa     │muttered something like: “It’s too
 come: È troppo!                    │much.”
                                    │
 Se egli intendesse troppa felicità,│Whether he meant too much
 o semplicemente commentasse il     │happiness, or simply commented upon
 numero della sua discendenza, è    │the number of his descendants, it
 impossibile dire. Prese un’aria    │is impossible to say. He looked
 offesa, per quanto la sua vecchia  │offended—as far as his old wooden
 faccia incartapecorita potesse     │face could express anything; and
 esprimerlo; e fu visto per giorni e│for days afterwards could be seen,
 giorni, quasi a tutte le ore,      │almost any time of the day, sitting
 seduto al cancello, col mento sulle│at the gate, with his nose over his
 ginocchia, una pipa fra le gengive,│knees, a pipe between his gums, and
 tutto rattratto in una specie di   │gathered up into a kind of raging
 rabbiosa e concentrata musoneria.  │concentrated sulkiness.
                                    │
 Una volta si rivolse querulo al    │Once he spoke to his son, alluding
 figlio, alludendo ai nuovi venuti: │to the newcomers with a groan:
                                    │
 Liticheranno pel podere!           │“They will quarrel over the land.”
                                    │
 Non preoccupatevi di ciò, babbo!   │“Don’t bother about that, father,”
 rispose Jean-Pierre con aria       │answered Jean-Pierre, stolidly, and
 stolida, e passò, piegato in due,  │passed, bent double, towing a
 rimorchiandosi per sopra la spalla │recalcitrant cow over his shoulder.
 una vacca recalcitrante.           │
                                    │
 Egli era felice, e così Susanna la │He was happy, and so was Susan, his
 sua sposa. Non era una gioia eterea│wife. It was not an ethereal joy
 accogliente delle anime nuove alla │welcoming new souls to struggle,
 lotta, forse alla vittoria... Fra  │perchance to victory. In fourteen
 quattordici anni entrambi i ragazzi│years both boys would be a help;
 sarebbero d’aiuto; e, più tardi,   │and, later on, Jean-Pierre pictured
 Jean-Pierre si figurava due robusti│two big sons striding over the land
 figlioli misuranti col passo la    │from patch to patch, wringing
 terra da zolla a zolla, e          │tribute from the earth beloved and
 strappando al suolo beneamato e    │fruitful.
 fertile il suo tributo.            │
                                    │
 Anche Susanna era felice, perchè   │Susan was happy too, for she did
 non desiderava che si parlasse di  │not want to be spoken of as the
 lei come della donna non benedetta,│unfortunate woman, and now she had
 ed ora che aveva dei figli, nessuno│children no one could call her
 avrebbe potuto darle tal nome.     │that.
                                    │
 Tanto lei che suo marito avevano   │Both herself and her husband had
 conosciuto un più vasto mondo—lui  │seen something of the larger
 al tempo del suo servizio militare,│world—he during the time of his
 mentre lei aveva passato circa un  │service; while she had spent a year
 anno a Parigi in una famiglia      │or so in Paris with a Breton
 bretone; ma aveva troppo sofferto  │family; but had been too home-sick
 di nostalgia per stare più a lungo │to remain longer away from the
 lontana dai suoi verdi colli,      │hilly and green country, set in a
 incastonati in una chiostra di rupi│barren circle of rocks and sands,
 e di dune, dov’era nata.           │where she had been born.
                                    │
 Pensava che uno dei bimbi forse    │She thought that one of the boys
 avrebbe potuto esser prete, ma non │ought perhaps to be a priest, but
 diceva nulla al marito, che era    │said nothing to her husband, who
 repubblicano e odiava i “corvi,”   │was a republican, and hated the
 com’egli chiamava i ministri della │“crows,” as he called the ministers
 religione.                         │of religion.
                                    │
 Il battesimo fu un affare          │The christening was a splendid
 grandioso. Tutto il comune fu      │affair. All the commune came to it,
 invitato, perchè i Bacadou erano   │for the Bacadous were rich and
 ricchi e influenti e, di tanto in  │influential, and, now and then, did
 tanto, non badavano a spese.       │not mind the expense. The
 L’avolo ebbe una giubba nuova.     │grandfather had a new coat.
                                    │
 Qualche mese dopo, una sera, dopo  │Some months afterwards, one evening
 che la cucina fu scopata e fu data │when the kitchen had been swept,
 una mandata alla porta,            │and the door locked, Jean-Pierre,
 Jean-Pierre, guardando verso il    │looking at the cot, asked his wife:
 letticello, domandò a sua moglie:  │
                                    │
 Che hanno quei ragazzi?            │“What’s the matter with those
                                    │children?”
                                    │
 E come se quelle parole pronunciate│And, as if these words, spoken
 con calma fossero state presagio di│calmly, had been the portent of
 male, ella rispose con sì alto     │misfortune, she answered with a
 gemito, ch’esso eccheggiò al di là │loud wail that must have been heard
 dall’aia fino al porcile; perchè i │across the yard in the pigsty; for
 maiali (quelli dei Bacadou erano i │the pigs (the Bacadous had the
 più belli del paese) s’agitarono e │finest pigs in the country) stirred
 grugnirono lamentosamente nella    │and grunted complainingly in the
 notte.                             │night.
                                    │
 Il marito continuò a maciullare    │The husband went on grinding his
 lentamente il suo pane e burro,    │bread and butter slowly, gazing at
 fissando il muro, mentre la        │the wall, the soup-plate smoking
 scodella della minestra continuava │under his chin.
 a fumargli sotto il mento.         │
                                    │
 Era ritornato tardi dal mercato,   │He had returned late from the
 dove aveva afferrato alle sue      │market, where he had overheard (not
 spalle (e non per la prima volta)  │for the first time) whispers behind
 un bisbiglio.                      │his back.
                                    │
 Egli rimuginò in mente le parole   │He revolved the words in his mind
 ritornando col cavallo.            │as he drove back.
                                    │
 Scemi! Tutt’e due... Due disutili  │“Simple! Both of them.... Never any
 per sempre!... Ebbene! Può anche   │use!... Well! May be, may be. One
 darsi. Si vedrà. Si chiederà alla  │must see. Would ask his wife.”
 sposa...                           │
                                    │
 Questa era la risposta.            │This was her answer.
                                    │
 Sentì come una mazzata alla nuca,  │He felt like a blow on his chest,
 ma disse solamente:                │but said only:
                                    │
 Va a spillare del sidro. Ho sete!  │“Go, draw me some cider. I am
                                    │thirsty!”
                                    │
 Ella uscì piagnucolando, con un    │She went out moaning, an empty jug
 boccale vuoto in mano. Allora egli │in her hand. Then he arose, took up
 si alzò, prese il lume, e mosse    │the light, and moved slowly toward
 lentamente verso la culla. Essi    │the cradle. They slept. He looked
 dormivano. Li guardò di sbircio,   │at them sideways, finished his
 finì lì il suo boccone, se ne      │mouthful there, went back heavily,
 ritornò grevemente, e sedette      │and sat down before his plate.
 davanti alla sua scodella.         │
                                    │
 Quando sua moglie tornò egli non   │When his wife returned he never
 alzò lo sguardo, ma ingoiò         │looked up, but swallowed a couple
 rumorosamente un paio di cucchiate │of spoonfuls noisily, and remarked,
 e osservò in modo ottuso:          │in a dull manner—
                                    │
 Quando dormono, essi sono come i   │“When they sleep they are like
 figlioli degli altri.              │other people’s children.”
                                    │
 Essa si lasciò andare su uno       │She sat down suddenly on a stool
 sgabello lì accanto, scossa da una │near by, and shook with a silent
 tempesta di singulti senza parola, │tempest of sobs, unable to speak.
 incapace a parlare.                │
                                    │
 Egli finì il suo pasto, e rimase   │He finished his meal, and remained
 buttato all’ indietro sulla sua    │idly thrown back in his chair, his
 sedia, l’occhio perduto fra le     │eyes lost amongst the black rafters
 travi nere del soffitto.           │of the ceiling.
                                    │
 Davanti a lui la candela di sevo   │Before him the tallow candle flared
 fiammeggiava rossa e diritta,      │red and straight, sending up a
 mandando in alto un filo sottile di│slender thread of smoke. The light
 fumo. La luce batteva sulla pelle  │lay on the rough, sunburnt skin of
 ruvida e abbronzata della sua gola;│his throat; the sunk cheeks were
 le guancie infossate erano come    │like patches of darkness, and his
 zone d’ombra, ed il suo aspetto era│aspect was mournfully stolid, as if
 pietosamente stolido, come se      │he had ruminated with difficulty
 ruminasse con difficoltà tutto un  │endless ideas.
 groviglio d’idee.                  │
                                    │
 Poi disse deliberatamente:         │Then he said, deliberately:
                                    │
 Dobbiamo vedere... consultare      │“We must see ... consult people.
 qualcuno. Non piangere... Non      │Don’t cry.... They won’t be all
 saranno tutti così...              │like that ... surely! We must sleep
 certamente!... Ora si va a dormire.│now.”
                                    │
 Dopo che il terzo figliolo, un     │After the third child, also a boy,
 bambino pure, fu nato, Jean-Pierre │was born, Jean-Pierre went about
 si mise d’intorno al suo lavoro con│his work with tense hopefulness.
 intensa speranza. Le sue labbra    │His lips seemed more narrow, more
 sembravano più sottili, più        │tightly compressed than before; as
 strettamente serrate di prima, come│if for fear of letting the earth he
 per paura di lasciare udire alla   │tilled hear the voice of hope that
 terra che arava la voce della      │murmured within his breast.
 speranza, che sussurrava dentro al │
 suo petto.                         │
                                    │
 Egli guatava il bambino,           │He watched the child, stepping up
 dirigendosi verso il suo letticiolo│to the cot with a heavy clang of
 con un pesante risonare di zoccoli │sabots on the stone floor, and
 sul pavimento di pietra, e vi      │glanced in, along his shoulder,
 buttava dentro un’occhiata sopra la│with that indifference which is
 spalla, con quella indifferenza che│like a deformity of peasant
 è come un’insita deformità         │humanity.
 dell’anima campagnola.             │
                                    │
 Come la terra ch’essi dominano e   │Like the earth they master and
 servono a un tempo, questi uomini, │serve, those men, slow of eye and
 d’occhi e di parole tardi, non     │speech, do not show the inner fire;
 mostrano l’interno fuoco, cosicchè,│so that, at last, it becomes a
 in fondo, noi finiamo per          │question with them as with the
 domandarci, in quanto a loro come  │earth, what there is in the core:
 in quanto alla terra, cos’hanno nel│heat, violence, a force mysterious
 loro nocciolo: ardore, violenza,   │and terrible—or nothing but a clod,
 una forza misteriosa e terribile—o │a mass fertile and inert, cold and
 nient’altro che un pugno di terra, │unfeeling, ready to bear a crop of
 massa fertile e inerte, fredda e   │plants that sustain life or give
 insensibile, da cui nascerà la     │death.
 pianta che sosterrà la vita oppure │
 quella che arrecherà la morte.     │
                                    │
 La madre vegliava con altri occhi; │The mother watched with other eyes;
 ascoltava con altre orecchie,      │listened with otherwise expectant
 altrimenti ansiose.                │ears.
                                    │
 Sotto gli alti scaffali sospesi,   │Under the high hanging shelves
 sorreggenti in alto grandi pezze di│supporting great sides of bacon
 carne secca, materialmente ella    │overhead, her body was busy by the
 s’affacendava d’attorno al         │great fire-place, attentive to the
 focolare, attenta alla pentola     │pot swinging on iron gallows,
 dondolante ai ganci di ferro,      │scrubbing the long table where the
 fregando la lunga tavola dove le   │field hands would sit down directly
 opre si sarebbero assise in breve  │to their evening meal.
 al loro pasto della sera.          │
                                    │
 Ma la sua mente rimaneva presso    │Her mind remained by the cradle,
 alla culla, notte e giorno         │night and day on the watch, to hope
 vegliando, nella speranza e nel    │and suffer.
 dolore.                            │
                                    │
 Quel bimbo, come gli altri due, non│That child, like the other two,
 sorrideva mai, non le porgeva mai  │never smiled, never stretched its
 le piccole braccia, non parlava    │hands to her, never spoke; never
 mai; mai uno sguardo accennava a   │had a glance of recognition for her
 riconoscerla, uno sguardo dei suoi │in its big black eyes, which could
 grandi occhi neri, che si          │only stare fixedly at any glitter,
 sbarravano solo davanti ad uno     │but failed hopelessly to follow the
 scintillio, ma che, ahimè, non     │brilliance of a sun-ray slipping
 sapevano neppure seguire la        │slowly along the floor.
 radiosità di un raggio di sole che │
 s’adagiasse lento sul pavimento.   │
                                    │
 Quando gli uomini erano al lavoro, │When the men were at work she spent
 ella passava giornate interminabili│long days between her three idiot
 fra i suoi tre figlioli idioti ed  │children and the childish
 il loro nonno rimbambito, che      │grandfather, who sat grim, angular,
 sedeva arcigno, angoloso e         │and immovable, with his feet near
 immobile, coi piedi presso le      │the warm ashes of the fire.
 ceneri calde del focolare.         │
                                    │
 Il debole vecchio sembrava         │The feeble old fellow seemed to
 sospettare che ci fosse qualcosa di│suspect that there was something
 strano nei suoi nepoti.            │wrong with his grandsons.
                                    │
 Una volta sola, mosso forse        │Only once, moved either by
 dall’affetto o forse per un vago   │affection or by the sense of
 senso dei suoi doveri di nonno,    │proprieties, he attempted to nurse
 egli si mise d’attorno al piccino. │the youngest. He took the boy up
 Alzò il bimbo da terra, schioccò la│from the floor, clicked his tongue
 lingua per divertirlo, e arrischiò │at him, and essayed a shaky gallop
 una galoppata tutta a scosse sulle │of his bony knees. Then he looked
 sue ginocchia aguzze. Poi, col suo │closely with his misty eyes at the
 sguardo intorbidato, guardò da     │child’s face and deposited him down
 presso la faccia del bimbo: e      │gently on the floor again.
 adagino lo riposò giù di nuovo sul │
 pavimento.                         │
                                    │
 E sedette ancora, coi suoi magri   │And he sat, his lean shanks
 stinchi incrociati, crollando il   │crossed, nodding at the steam
 capo al vapore sfuggente dalla     │escaping from the cooking-pot with
 pentola al bollore, con sguardo    │a gaze senile and worried.
 senile e crucciato.                │
                                    │
 A poco a poco un’afflizione muta   │Then mute affliction dwelt in
 s’insediò alla masseria dei        │Bacadou’s farmhouse, sharing the
 Bacadou, condividendo il respiro ed│breath and the bread of its
 il pane dei suoi famigliari; ed il │inhabitants; and the priest of the
 curato della parrocchia di Ploumar │Ploumar parish had great cause for
 ebbe alta cagione di compiacimento.│congratulation.
                                    │
 Egli fece visita al ricco          │He called upon the rich landowner,
 feudatario, il marchese di         │the Marquis de Chavanes, on purpose
 Chavannes, allo scopo di esalare   │to deliver himself with joyful
 con gioconda unzione le sue solenni│unction of solemn platitudes about
 insipienze sulle vie               │the inscrutable ways of Providence.
 imperscrutabili della Provvidenza. │
                                    │
 Nella vasta penombra del salotto a │In the vast dimness of the
 gran cortinaggi, l’ometto, simile a│curtained drawing-room, the little
 un capezzale nero a rullo, si      │man, resembling a black bolster,
 chinava verso un divano, col       │leaned toward a couch, his hat on
 cappello sulle ginocchia, e        │his knees, and gesticulated with a
 gesticolava con una mano grassoccia│fat hand at the elongated,
 alle linee allungate e             │gracefully-flowing lines of the
 graziosamente drappeggiate della   │clear Parisian toilette from within
 chiara toilette parigina, da dentro│which the half-amused, half-bored
 alla quale la marchesa, fra        │marquise listened with gracious
 divertita e seccata, ascoltava con │languor.
 vezzoso languore.                  │
                                    │
 Egli era esultante ed umile, altero│He was exulting and humble, proud
 e pavido. L’incredibile s’era      │and awed. The impossible had come
 avverato! Jean-Pierre Bacadou,     │to pass. Jean-Pierre Bacadou, the
 quell’arrabbiato contadino         │enraged republican farmer, had been
 repubblicano, la scorsa domenica   │to Mass last Sunday—had proposed to
 era stato alla messa—s’era         │entertain the visiting priests at
 impegnato a convitare i preti      │the next festival of Ploumar!
 venenti alla prossima festa di     │
 Ploumar!...                        │
                                    │
 Era un trionfo per la Chiesa e per │It was a triumph for the Church and
 la Santa Causa!                    │for the good cause.
                                    │
 Pensai di venir subito a           │“I thought I would come at once to
 raccontarlo al Signor Marchese. So │tell Monsieur le Marquis. I know
 quant’egli è ansioso del bene del  │how anxious he is for the welfare
 nostro paese! dichiarò il prete    │of our country,” declared the
 asciugandosi il volto.             │priest, wiping his face.
                                    │
 Fu subito invitato a desinare.     │He was asked to stay to dinner.
                                    │
 I Chavanes, tornando quella sera   │The Chavanes returning that
 dall’aver accompagnato il loro     │evening, after seeing their guest
 ospite al gran cancello del parco, │to the main gate of the park,
 discussero la cosa, errando al     │discussed the matter while they
 chiaro di luna e trascinando le    │strolled in the moonlight, trailing
 loro lunghe ombre pel diritto viale│their long shadows up the straight
 dei castagni.                      │avenue of chestnuts.
                                    │
 Il marchese, realista[9]           │The marquis, a royalist[10] of
 naturalmente, era stato sindaco del│course, had been mayor of the
 comune che include Ploumar, gli    │commune which includes Ploumar, the
 sparsi borghetti lungo la costa, e │scattered hamlets of the coast, and
 le isole rocciose che orlano la    │the stony islands that fringe the
 gialla spianata delle dune. Egli   │yellow flatness of the sands. He
 aveva sentito la sua posizione     │had felt his position insecure, for
 malsicura, perchè c’era una forte  │there was a strong republican
 corrente repubblicana in quella    │element in that part of the
 parte della campagna; ma ora la    │country; but now the conversion of
 conversione di Jean-Pierre lo      │Jean-Pierre made him safe. He was
 metteva al salvo. Egli se ne       │very pleased.
 compiaceva grandemente.            │
                                    │
 Non hai un’idea come quella gente  │“You have no idea how influential
 sia influente! spiegava alla       │those people are,” he explained to
 moglie. Ora non ne dubito punto, la│his wife. “Now, I am sure, the next
 prossima elezione andrà a vele     │communal election will go all
 gonfie. Io sarò rieletto.          │right. I shall be re-elected.”
                                    │
 La tua ambizione è addirittura     │“Your ambition is perfectly
 insaziabile, Carlo! esclamò la     │insatiable, Charles,” exclaimed the
 marchesa gaiamente.                │marquise, gaily.
                                    │
 Ma, ma chère amie, ribattè il      │“But, ma chère amie,” argued the
 marito seriamente, ha una grande   │husband, seriously, “it’s most
 importanza che quest’anno il       │important that the right man should
 sindaco sia la vera persona atta   │be mayor this year, because of the
 alla carica, a causa delle elezioni│elections to the Chamber. If you
 alla Camera. Se credi che ciò mi   │think it amuses me....”
 diverta...                         │
                                    │
 Jean-Pierre s’era arreso alla madre│Jean-Pierre had surrendered to his
 di sua moglie. Madame Levaille era │wife’s mother. Madame Levaille was
 una donna d’affari, conosciuta e   │a woman of business, known and
 rispettata per un raggio di almeno │respected within a radius of at
 quindici miglia all’intorno. Solida│least fifteen miles. Thick-set and
 e robusta, la si vedeva per la     │stout, she was seen about the
 campagna a piedi o nel baroccio di │country, on foot or in an
 un conoscente, sempre in moto, a   │acquaintance’s cart, perpetually
 dispetto dei suoi cinquantott’anni,│moving, in spite of her fifty-eight
 sempre dietro ai suoi affari.      │years, in steady pursuit of
                                    │business.
                                    │
 Ella aveva case in tutti i         │She had houses in all the hamlets,
 borghetti, gestiva cave di granito,│she worked quarries of granite, she
 caricava navi costiere di pietra,  │freighted coasters with stone—even
 trafficava perfino colle isole     │traded with the Channel Islands.
 Normanne. Ella aveva mascelle      │She was broad-cheeked, wide-eyed,
 sviluppate, occhi grandi, parola   │persuasive in speech; carrying her
 persuasiva; sostenendo il suo punto│point with the placid and
 colla placida e invincibile        │invincible obstinacy of an old
 ostinatezza di una vecchia che sa  │woman who knows her own mind.
 ciò che vuole.                     │
                                    │
 Raramente ella dormiva due notti di│She very seldom slept for two
 seguito nella stessa casa; e le    │nights together in the same house;
 bettole delle via maestra erano i  │and the wayside inns were the best
 luoghi più indicati per prendere   │places to inquire in as to her
 informazioni in quanto alle sue    │whereabouts. She had either passed,
 eventuali stanze: o era passata, o │or was expected to pass there at
 sarebbe passata alle sei; oppure   │six; or somebody, coming in, had
 qualcuno, entrando, l’aveva vista  │seen her in the morning, or
 al mattino, o aspettava            │expected to meet her that evening.
 d’incontrarla quella sera.         │
                                    │
 Dopo le osterie prospicenti la     │After the inns that command the
 strada, le chiese erano gli edifici│roads, the churches were the
 ch’ella più frequentava. Gli uomini│buildings she frequented most. Men
 dalle opinioni liberali solevano   │of liberal opinions would induce
 indurre i ragazzetti a fare una    │small children to run into sacred
 corsa nei sacri luoghi per vedere  │edifices to see whether Madame
 se Madame Levaille c’era, e per    │Levaille was there, and to tell her
 dirle che il tale dei tali era     │that so-and-so was in the road
 sulla via in attesa di             │waiting to speak to her—about
 parlarle—circa alle patate, alla   │potatoes, or flour, or stones, or
 farina, ai sassi, o alle case; ed  │houses; and she would curtail her
 ella soleva troncare le sue        │devotions, come out blinking and
 devozioni e uscire, sbattendo gli  │crossing herself into the sunshine;
 occhi abbagliati e segnandosi nel  │ready to discuss business matters
 sole; pronta a discutere d’affari, │in a calm, sensible way across a
 calma e posata, sul piano di una   │table in the kitchen of the inn
 tavola, nella cucina dell’osteria  │opposite.
 dirimpetto.                        │
                                    │
 Recentemente s’era fermata più     │Latterly she had stayed for a few
 volte per parecchi giorni di       │days several times with her
 seguito dal genero, tirando fuori i│son-in-law, arguing against sorrow
 suoi argomenti contro i dispiaceri │and misfortune with composed face
 e l’avversa fortuna, con faccia    │and gentle tones.
 composta e tono benevolo.          │
                                    │
 Jean-Pierre sentì le convinzioni   │Jean-Pierre felt the convictions
 assorbite al reggimento sradicarsi │imbibed in the regiment torn out of
 dal suo petto—non per forza        │his breast—not by arguments, but by
 d’argomenti, ma di fatti. Misurando│facts. Striding over his fields he
 col passo i suoi campi ci ripensò. │thought it over.
                                    │
 Tre ce n’erano. Tre! Tutti eguali! │There were three of them. Three!
 Perchè?... Tali cose non           │All alike! Why? Such things did not
 succedevano a tutti, anzi a        │happen to everybody—to nobody he
 nessuno, ch’egli avesse udito! Uno │ever heard of. One yet—it might
 ancora... poteva passare. Ma tre!  │pass. But three! All three. For
 Tutti e tre! Disutili per sempre,  │ever useless, to be fed while he
 da doverseli campare finch’egli    │lived and ...  What would become of
 fosse in vita e... Cosa ne sarebbe │the land when he died?
 divenuto della terra dopo la sua   │
 morte?                             │
                                    │
 Bisognava pensarci bene... Egli    │This must be seen to. He would
 sacrificherebbe le sue convinzioni!│sacrifice his convictions.
                                    │
 Un giorno egli disse alla moglie:  │One day he told his wife:
                                    │
 Guarda un po’ ciò che il tuo Dio   │“See what your God will do for us.
 possa fare per noi. Fa dire qualche│Pay for some masses.”
 messa.                             │
                                    │
 Susanna abbracciò il suo uomo. Egli│Susan embraced her man. He stood
 si tenne rigido, poi girò sui      │unbending, then turned on his heels
 talloni e uscì.                    │and went out.
                                    │
 Ma più tardi, quando una nera      │But afterwards, when a black
 sottana oscurò la sua soglia, egli │_soutane_ darkened his doorway, he
 non fece obbiezione; anzi offerse  │did not object; even offered some
 egli stesso del sidro al prete.    │cider himself to the priest.
                                    │
 Egli ascoltò i ragionamenti con    │He listened to the talk meekly;
 sottomissione; andò alla messa fra │went to Mass between the two women;
 le due donne; adempì ciò che il    │accomplished what the priest called
 prete chiamava “i suoi doveri      │“his religious duties” at Easter.
 religiosi,” a Pasqua.              │
                                    │
 Ma quella mattina si sentì come un │That morning he felt like a man who
 uomo che abbia venduto l’anima. Nel│had sold his soul. In the afternoon
 pomeriggio egli ebbe una zuffa     │he fought ferociously with an old
 feroce con un vecchio amico e      │friend and neighbour who had
 vicino che aveva rimarcato che     │remarked that the priests had the
 quello era stato una vera bazza per│best of it and were now going to
 i pastori della chiesa, e che      │eat the priest-eater.
 l’accanito mangia-preti stavano    │
 proprio pappandoselo loro.         │
                                    │
 Venne a casa sanguinante e         │He came home dishevelled and
 scarmigliato, e capitandogli       │bleeding, and happening to catch
 l’occhio sopra i suoi figlioli (che│sight of his children (they were
 generalmente erano tenuti fuori    │kept generally out of the way),
 mano), maledì e bestemmiò          │cursed and swore incoherently,
 incoerentemente, pestando i pugni  │banging the table.
 sulla tavola.                      │
                                    │
 Susanna pianse. Madame Levaille    │Susan wept. Madame Levaille sat
 rimase seduta serenamente, senza   │serenely unmoved. She assured her
 commuoversi. Ella rassicurò la     │daughter that “It will pass”; and
 figliola che “Passerà,” e,         │taking up her thick umbrella,
 prendendo su il suo ombrellone, se │departed in haste to see after a
 ne andò in fretta a vedere di uno  │schooner she was going to load with
 schooner che stava per caricare di │granite from her quarry.
 granito della sua cava.            │
                                    │
 Circa un anno dopo era nata la     │A year or so afterwards the girl
 bimba.                             │was born.
                                    │
 Una femmina. Jean-Pierre lo venne a│A girl. Jean-Pierre heard of it in
 sapere mentre stava nei campi, e fu│the fields, and was so upset by the
 così sconvolto dalla notizia, che  │news that he sat down on the
 si lasciò andare sul muricciolo di │boundary wall and remained there
 confine e vi rimase fino a sera,   │till the evening, instead of going
 invece di andare a casa come n’era │home as he was urged to do.
 sollecitato.                       │
                                    │
 Una femmina! Si sentì a mezzo      │A girl! He felt half cheated.
 truffato.                          │
                                    │
 Però, quando giunse a casa, era in │However, when he got home he was
 parte riconciliato col suo destino.│partly reconciled to his fate. One
 La si poteva maritare a un bravo   │could marry her to a good
 giovane—non a un fannullone, ma a  │fellow—not to a good for nothing,
 un ragazzo con un po’ di sale in   │but to a fellow with some
 zucca e un buon paio di braccia.   │understanding and a good pair of
                                    │arms.
                                    │
 Inoltre, il prossimo avrebbe potuto│Besides, the next may be a boy, he
 essere un maschio, pensava.        │thought.
                                    │
 Naturalmente su quelli non ci      │Of course they would be all right.
 sarebbero state tare. La sua nuova │His new credulity knew of no doubt.
 credenza non conosceva dubbi. La   │The ill luck was broken.
 mala sorte era infranta!           │
                                    │
 Egli parlò con buonumore a sua     │He spoke cheerily to his wife. She
 moglie. Anch’essa era piena di     │was also hopeful. Three priests
 speranza. Tre preti vennero a quel │came to that christening, and
 battesimo, e Madame Levaille fu la │Madame Levaille was godmother.
 comare.                            │
                                    │
 Ma il tempo diede a vedere che     │The child turned out an idiot too.
 anche questa sua bimba era         │
 stupida...                         │
                                    │
 Da allora, nei giorni di mercato,  │Then on market days Jean-Pierre was
 Jean-Pierre fu visto contrattare   │seen bargaining bitterly,
 con acrimonia, rissoso e vorace;   │quarrelsome and greedy; then
 poi ubriacarsi con taciturna       │getting drunk with taciturn
 veemenza; poi ritornare al         │earnestness; then driving home in
 crepuscolo nel suo biroccio a gran │the dusk at a rate fit for a
 carriera come se andasse a nozze,  │wedding, but with a face gloomy
 ma con una faccia buia da funerale.│enough for a funeral.
                                    │
 Qualche volta insisteva perchè sua │Sometimes he would insist for his
 moglie l’accompagnasse, e, al      │wife to come with him; and they
 mattino presto, il biroccio li     │would drive in the early morning,
 sobbalzava da un canto all’altro   │shaking side by side on the narrow
 dello stretto sedile, sopra il     │seat above the helpless pig that,
 porcello che, impotente, colle sue │with tied legs, grunted a
 zampe legate, grugniva un suo      │melancholy sigh at every rut.
 malinconico sospiro ad ogni        │
 sussulto sulle carreggiate.        │
                                    │
 Le trottate della mattina erano    │The morning drives were silent; but
 silenziose; ma alla sera venendo a │in the evening, coming home,
 casa Jean-Pierre, ubriaco,         │Jean-Pierre, tipsy, was viciously
 borbottava senza ritegno e         │muttering, and growled at the
 imprecava contro la malaugurata    │confounded woman who could not rear
 donna che non poteva mettere al    │children that were like anybody
 mondo figlioli che fossero come    │else’s.
 quelli di tutta l’altra gente.     │
                                    │
 Susanna, aggrappandosi per i       │Susan, holding on against the
 sobbalzi del carro, dava a credere │erratic swayings of the cart,
 di non udire.                      │pretended not to hear.
                                    │
 Una volta, attraversando Ploumar,  │Once, as they were driving through
 un istinto oscuro e briaco gli     │Ploumar, some obscure and drunken
 suggerì di arrestare di botto fin  │impulse caused him to pull up
 dirimpetto alla chiesa.            │sharply opposite the church.
                                    │
 La luna navigava fra bianche nuvole│The moon swam amongst light white
 leggere. Le pietre dei sepolcri    │clouds. The tombstones gleamed pale
 biancheggiavano sotto le ombre     │under the fretted shadows of the
 chiazzate degli alberi del         │trees in the churchyard. Even the
 cimitero. Perfino i cani del       │village dogs slept. Only the
 villaggio dormivano. Solo gli      │nightingales, awake, spun out the
 usignoli, svegli, filavano i trilli│thrill of their song above the
 della loro canzone sovra il        │silence of graves.
 silenzio delle tombe.              │
                                    │
 Jean-Pierre disse a lingua grossa a│Jean-Pierre said thickly to his
 sua moglie:                        │wife:
                                    │
 Cosa credi che ci sia là?          │“What do you think is there?”
                                    │
 Egli indicò il campanile colla     │He pointed his whip at the tower—in
 frusta—sul quale il gran quadrante │which the big dial of the clock
 dell’orologio appariva alto nel    │appeared high in the moonlight like
 chiarore lunare come una pallida   │a pallid face without eyes—and
 faccia senz’occhi—e dopo esser     │getting out carefully, fell down at
 sceso con prudenza, cadde ad un    │once by the wheel. He picked
 tratto presso la ruota. Si tirò su │himself up and climbed one by one
 e salì a fatica uno ad uno i pochi │the few steps to the iron gate of
 gradini, fino al cancello di ferro │the churchyard.
 del cimitero.                      │
                                    │
 Mise la faccia alle sbarre e chiamò│He put his face to the bars and
 indistintamente:                   │called out indistinctly:
                                    │
 Ohè là! Venite fuori!              │“Hey there! Come out!”
                                    │
 Jean! Torna! Torna! supplicò sua   │“Jean! Return! Return!” entreated
 moglie dominando la voce.          │his wife in low tones.
                                    │
 Egli non se ne addiede, e sembrò   │He took no notice, and seemed to
 attender lì.                       │wait there.
                                    │
 Il canto dell’usignolo percoteva da│The song of nightingales beat on
 ogni lato contro gli alti muri     │all sides against the high walls of
 della chiesa, e fluiva di ritorno  │the church, and flowed back between
 fra le croci di pietra e le grigie │stone crosses and flat grey slabs,
 lapidi piane, incise di parole di  │engraved with words of hope and
 speranza e di dolore.              │sorrow.
                                    │
 Ohe! Venite fuori!—urlò forte      │“Hey! Come out!” shouted
 Jean-Pierre.                       │Jean-Pierre loudly.
                                    │
 Gli usignoli cessarono di cantare. │The nightingales ceased to sing.
                                    │
 Nessuno? continuò Jean-Pierre. Non │“Nobody?” went on Jean-Pierre.
 c’è nessuno! Una mistificazione dei│“Nobody there. A swindle of the
 corvi. Ecco cos’è. Nessuno in alcun│crows. That’s what this is. Nobody
 luogo. Pouah! Allez! Houp!         │anywhere. I despise it. Allez!
                                    │Houp!”
                                    │
 Egli scosse il cancello con tutta  │He shook the gate with all his
 la sua forza, e le sbarre di ferro │strength, and the iron bars rattled
 cigolarono con pauroso strepito,   │with a frightful clanging, like a
 come una catena strascicata su dei │chain dragged over stone steps.
 gradini di pietra.                 │
                                    │
 Un cane lì presso abbaiò           │A dog near-by barked hurriedly.
 insistentemente.                   │
                                    │
 Jean-Pierre tornò indietro         │Jean-Pierre staggered back, and
 barcollando, e dopo tre colpi a    │after three successive dashes got
 vuoto riuscì ad entrare nel carro. │into his cart.
                                    │
 Susanna era lì quieta ed immobile. │Susan sat very quiet and still. He
 Egli le disse con burbanza da      │said to her with drunken severity:
 ubriaco:                           │
                                    │
 Hai visto? Nessuno. Si sono presi  │“See? Nobody. I’ve been made a
 gioco di me. Malheur! Ma           │fool! Malheur! Somebody will pay
 qualcheduno la pagherà. Il primo   │for it. The next one I see near the
 che vedo vicino a casa, lascio     │house I will lay my whip on ... on
 andar la frusta su... sul suo      │the black spine.... I will.
 groppone nero... lascio...         │
                                    │
 Non ce lo voglio... egli ajuta solo│“I don’t want him in there ... he
 i corvi mangia-carogne a spolpare  │only helps the carrion crows to rob
 la povera gente!                   │poor folk.
                                    │
 Io sono un uomo... Vogliamo vedere │“I am a man.... We will see if I
 se io non posso aver figlioli come │can’t have children like anybody
 tutti gli altri... Stavvi          │else ... now you mind.... They
 attenta!... Non saranno tutti...   │won’t be all ... all ... we
 tutti... Vedremo...                │see....”
                                    │
 Ella ebbe uno scoppio di fra le sue│She burst out through the fingers
 dita che le nascondevano la faccia:│that hid her face:
                                    │
 Non dir questo, Jean; non dir      │“Don’t say that, Jean; don’t say
 questo, marito mio.                │that, my man!”
                                    │
 Egli le lasciò andare un forte     │He struck her a swinging blow on
 picchio col dorso della mano, e la │the head with the back of his hand
 mandò a sbattere in fondo alla     │and knocked her into the bottom of
 carretta, dov’ella si accovacciò,  │the cart, where she crouched,
 malmenata in modo pietoso ad ogni  │thrown about lamentably by every
 scotimento del veicolo.            │jolt.
                                    │
 Egli guidò con furore, in piedi,   │He drove furiously, standing up,
 brandendo la frusta, scuotendo le  │brandishing his whip, shaking the
 redini sul cavallo grigio, che si  │reins over the grey horse that
 mise a galoppare pesantemente,     │galloped ponderously, making the
 facendo saltare la greve bardatura │heavy harness leap upon his broad
 sui suoi larghi quarti.            │quarters.
                                    │
 La campagna risonava clamorosamente│The country rang clamorous in the
 nella notte del latrato irritato   │night with the irritated barking of
 dei cani da pastori, il quale seguì│farm dogs, that followed the rattle
 lo strepito delle ruote durante    │of wheels all along the road. A
 tutta la strada. Un paio di        │couple of belated wayfarers had
 viandanti, sorpresi dalla notte,   │only just time to step into the
 ebbero appena tempo di cacciarsi   │ditch.
 nel fosso.                         │
                                    │
 Al cancello di casa diede di cozzo │At his own gate he caught the post
 nel palo e fu balzato fuor del     │and was shot out of the cart head
 carro a capofitto. Il cavallo      │first. The horse went on slowly to
 continuò lentamente fino alla      │the door.
 porta.                             │
                                    │
 Agli acuti strilli di Susanna, le  │At Susan’s piercing cries the farm
 opre della masseria si             │hands rushed out. She thought him
 precipitarono fuori. Ella lo       │dead, but he was only sleeping
 credette morto, ma egli si era     │where he fell, and cursed his men,
 invece addormentato là dov’era     │who hastened to him, for disturbing
 caduto, e imprecò ai suoi uomini   │his slumbers.
 corsi a lui, che avevano disturbato│
 i suoi sonni.                      │
                                    │
 Venne l’autunno. Il cielo          │Autumn came. The clouded sky
 annuvolato scendeva basso fino ai  │descended low upon the black
 neri contorni dei colli, e le      │contours of the hills; and the dead
 foglie morte danzavano in turbini a│leaves danced in spiral whirls
 spirali sotto gli alberi spogli,   │under naked trees, till the wind,
 finchè il vento, con profondo      │sighing profoundly, laid them to
 sospiro, le portava a riposo nelle │rest in the hollows of bare
 cavità delle valli ignude.         │valleys.
                                    │
 E da mattina a sera non si vedeva  │And from morning till night one
 sopra tutta la terra che neri rami │could see all over the land black
 spogli, rami nodosi e attorti, come│denuded boughs, the boughs gnarled
 se attorcigliati dal dolore,       │and twisted, as if contorted with
 ondeggianti tristemente fra le nubi│pain, swaying sadly between the wet
 pregne di pioggia e la terra molle.│clouds and the soaked earth. The
 I chiari e dolci ruscelli dei      │clear and gentle streams of summer
 giorni d’estate si precipitavano   │days rushed discoloured and raging
 torbidi e furiosi sui sassi che    │at the stones that barred the way
 sbarravano loro la via al mare,    │to the sea, with the fury of
 colla furia della demenza risoluta │madness bent upon suicide.
 al suicidio.                       │
                                    │
 Da orizzonte a orizzonte la gran   │From horizon to horizon the great
 via che conduceva alle dune giaceva│road to the sands lay between the
 fra i colli in un triste           │hills in a dull glitter of empty
 biancheggiare di vane curve, come  │curves, resembling an unnavigable
 un’impraticabile riviera di melma. │river of mud.
                                    │
 Jean-Pierre camminava da un campo  │Jean-Pierre went from field to
 all’altro, figura alta e quasi     │field, moving blurred and tall in
 sfumata nella pioggerella nebbiosa,│the drizzle, or striding on the
 o percorreva a gran passi la cresta│crests of rises, lonely and high
 delle alture solitarie ed alte     │upon the grey curtain of drifting
 contro la grigia cortina di nubi   │clouds, as if he had been pacing
 accumulate, come se egli misurasse │along the very edge of the
 col piede il limitare              │universe.
 dell’universo.                     │
                                    │
 Egli guardava la terra nera, la    │He looked at the black earth, at
 terra muta e carica di promesse, la│the earth mute and promising, at
 terra misteriosa generatrice di    │the mysterious earth doing its work
 vita in apparente immobilità di    │of life in death-like stillness
 morte, sotto il corruccio velato   │under the veiled sorrow of the sky.
 del cielo.                         │
                                    │
 E gli parve che per un uomo peggio │And it seemed to him that to a man
 che privato di figli non ci fosse  │worse than childless there was no
 promessa nella fertilità dei campi;│promise in the fertility of fields,
 che la terra da lui rifuggisse, lo │that from him the earth escaped,
 sfidasse, gli si mostrasse         │defied him, frowned at him like the
 accigliata, come le nuvole che si  │clouds, sombre and hurried above
 rincorrevano cupe sovra la sua     │his head.
 testa.                             │
                                    │
 Cosciente d’esser solo ad affrontar│Having to face alone his own
 la sua terra, sentì tutta          │fields, he felt the inferiority of
 l’inferiorità dell’uomo il quale   │man who passes away before the clod
 passa, davanti alla zolla che      │that remains. Must he give up the
 rimane. Doveva egli rinunciare alla│hope of having by his side a son
 speranza d’aver per sè un figliolo │who would look at the turned-up
 che sorvegliasse la zolla rivelta  │sods with a master’s eye? A man
 con occhio di padrone? Un uomo che │that would think as he thought,
 pensasse com’egli pensava, che     │that would feel as he felt; a man
 sentisse com’egli sentiva; un uomo │who would be part of himself, and
 che fosse parte di sè stesso e     │yet remain to trample masterfully
 rimanesse tuttavia a calcare da    │on that earth when he was gone!
 dominatore quella terra, quand’egli│
 non ci fosse più?                  │
                                    │
 Pensò a dei lontani parenti, e     │He thought of some distant
 un’astiosità lo strinse da farlo   │relations, and felt savage enough
 imprecare a loro ad alta voce.     │to curse them aloud. They! Never!
 Essi? Mai!                         │
                                    │
 Volse verso casa, puntando diritto │He turned homewards, going straight
 al tetto della sua abitazione,     │at the roof of his dwelling visible
 visibile fra gli scheletri         │between the enlaced skeletons of
 allacciati degli alberi. Mentre    │trees. As he swung his legs over
 egli buttava le gambe sovra lo     │the stile a cawing flock of birds
 steccato, uno stormo crocidante di │settled slowly on the field;
 uccelli calò con lento volo sul    │dropped down behind his back,
 campo; scese dietro a lui, in      │noiseless and fluttering, like
 silenzioso ondeggiamento, come     │flakes of soot.
 batuffoli di fuliggine.            │




                                  III


 Quel giorno Madame Levaille era    │That day Madame Levaille had gone
 andata presto nel pomeriggio alla  │early in the afternoon to the house
 casa che aveva vicino a Kervanion. │she had near Kervanion. She had to
 Ella doveva pagare degli uomini che│pay some of the men who worked in
 lavoravano là nella sua cava di    │her granite quarry there, and she
 granito, e ci andava per tempo,    │went in good time because her
 perchè nella sua casetta ella      │little house contained a shop where
 faceva anche osteria, perchè gli   │the workmen could spend their wages
 operai avessero agio di dar fondo  │without the trouble of going to
 ai loro salari senza il disturbo di│town.
 arrivare fino alla città.          │
                                    │
 La casa era tutta sola fra le      │The house stood alone amongst
 balze. Un vicolo fatto di sassi e  │rocks. A lane of mud and stones
 fango si trascinava fino alla      │ended at the door. The sea-winds
 porta. I venti di mare, venendo a  │coming ashore on Stonecutter’s
 riva da Punta Tagliapietra, freschi│point, fresh from the fierce
 ancora del fiero tumulto delle     │turmoil of the waves, howled
 acque, urlavano violentemente      │violently at the unmoved heaps of
 contro gli scogli neri ed immobili,│black boulders holding up steadily
 ammonticchiati gli uni su gli      │short-armed, high crosses against
 altri, che sorreggevano fermamente │the tremendous rush of the
 alte croci dalle brevi braccia,    │invisible.
 contro il tremendo infuriare       │
 dell’invisibile.                   │
                                    │
 Nell’imperversare dei venti la casa│In the sweep of gales the sheltered
 stava al riparo in una calma sonora│dwelling stood in a calm resonant
 ed inquietante, come può esserlo la│and disquieting, like the calm in
 calma al centro di un uragano.     │the centre of a hurricane.
                                    │
 Nelle notti di tempesta, quando la │On stormy nights, when the tide was
 marea era bassa, la baia di        │out, the bay of Fougère, fifty feet
 Fougère, cinquanta piedi sotto la  │below the house, resembled an
 casa, sembrava un’immensa buca     │immense black pit, from which
 nera, da cui salivano mugolii e    │ascended mutterings and sighs as if
 sospiri, come se le rene laggiù    │the sands down there had been alive
 fossero animate dalla vita e dalla │and complaining. At high tide the
 sofferenza. Ad alta marea, l’acqua │returning water assaulted the
 ritornava assaltando i lembi delle │ledges of rock in short rushes,
 roccie in brevi impeti, finenti in │ending in bursts of livid light and
 scoppi di livide luci e in colonne │columns of spray, that flew inland,
 di spuma, che, riversandosi sulla  │stinging to death the grass of
 terra, portavano la morte nell’erba│pastures.
 della pastura.                     │
                                    │
 Le tenebre scesero dalle colline,  │The darkness came from the hills,
 invasero la costa, spensero i      │flowed over the coast, put out the
 fuochi rossi del tramonto, e       │red fires of sunset, and went on to
 dilagarono verso il mare dietro la │seaward pursuing the retiring tide.
 marea ritirantesi. Il vento calò   │The wind dropped with the sun,
 col sole, lasciando un mare        │leaving a maddened sea and a
 sconvolto ed un cielo devastato.   │devastated sky. The heavens above
 L’oscura volta sulla casa pareva   │the house seemed to be draped in
 drappeggiata di cenci neri,        │black rags, held up here and there
 trattenuti qua e là da spilloni di │by pins of fire.
 fuoco.                             │
                                    │
 Madame Levaille, serva quella sera │Madame Levaille, for this evening
 dei suoi stessi operai, tentava di │the servant of her own workmen,
 indurli a partire.                 │tried to induce them to depart.
                                    │
 Una donna vecchia come me dovrebbe │“An old woman like me ought to be
 essere a letto a un’ora così tarda,│in bed at this late hour,” she
 ella ripeteva, senza troppo        │good-humouredly repeated.
 malumore.                          │
                                    │
 I cavatori bevevano e chiedevano   │The quarrymen drank, asked for
 dell’altro. Essi urlavano da un    │more. They shouted over the table
 lato all’altro della tavola, come  │as if they had been talking across
 se parlassero attraverso a un      │a field. At one end four of them
 campo. Ad un capo quattro di loro  │played cards, banging the wood with
 giocavano a carte, bussando sul    │their hard knuckles, and swearing
 legno colle loro nocche indurite, e│at every lead.
 bestemmiando ad ogni mano.         │
                                    │
 Uno sedeva coll’occhio perduto,    │One sat with a lost gaze, humming a
 mugolando qualche battuta di una   │bar of some song, which he repeated
 canzone, e ripetendola             │endlessly.
 indefinitamente.                   │
                                    │
 Due altri, in un canto, liticavano │Two others, in a corner, were
 aspramente a quattr’occhi per una  │quarrelling confidentially and
 donna, fissandoseli da vicino come │fiercely over some woman, looking
 se volessero strapparseli, ma      │close into one another’s eyes as if
 parlando a sussurri, che           │they had wanted to tear them out,
 velatamente promettevano violenza e│but speaking in whispers that
 morte in un astioso sibilo di      │promised violence and murder
 sommesse parole.                   │discreetly, in a venomous
                                    │sibilation of subdued words.
                                    │
 C’era un’atmosfera densa da        │The atmosphere in there was thick
 tagliarsi col coltello. Tre candele│enough to slice with a knife. Three
 accese per la stanza mandavano una │candles burning about the long room
 luce rossa e smorta, come scintille│glowed red and dull like sparks
 che si spengano in cenere.         │expiring in ashes.
                                    │
 Il leggero stridio del saliscendi  │The slight click of the iron latch
 di ferro a così tarda ora, suonò   │was at that late hour as unexpected
 inatteso e allarmante come un      │and startling as a thunderclap.
 fragore di tuono. Madame Levaille  │Madame Levaille put down a bottle
 depose una bottiglia alzata sopra  │she held above a liqueur glass; the
 un bicchierino da liquori, i       │players turned their heads; the
 giuocatori volsero la testa, il    │whispered quarrel ceased; only the
 litigio sussurrato rimase sospeso; │singer, after darting a glance at
 solo il cantore, dopo aver lanciato│the door, went on humming with a
 un’occhiata alla porta, continuò il│stolid face.
 suo noioso ronzio con faccia       │
 stolida.                           │
                                    │
 Susanna apparve sulla soglia,      │Susan appeared in the doorway,
 entrò, sbattè la porta dietro a sè,│stepped in, flung the door to, and
 e vi si appoggiò contro, dicendo a │put her back against it, saying,
 mezza voce:                        │half aloud:
                                    │
 Mamma!                             │“Mother!”
                                    │
 Madame Levaille, risollevando la   │Madame Levaille, taking up the
 bottiglia, disse calma: Sei qui,   │bottle again, said calmly: “Here
 figliola? In che stato sei!        │you are, my girl. What a state you
                                    │are in!”
                                    │
 Il collo della bottiglia tinnì     │The neck of the bottle rang on the
 sull’orlo del bicchiere, segno     │rim of the glass, for the old woman
 evidente di emozione nella vecchia,│was startled, and the idea that the
 a cui attraversò il pensiero che la│farm had caught fire had entered
 masseria fosse in fiamme. Non      │her head. She could think of no
 poteva vederci altra cagione       │other cause for her daughter’s
 nell’apparizione di sua figlia.    │appearance.
                                    │
 Susanna, molle d’acqua e schizzata │Susan, soaked and muddy, stared the
 di fango, guardò con occhi sbarrati│whole length of the room toward the
 per tutta la lunghezza della stanza│men at the far end. Her mother
 fino agli uomini al capo opposto.  │asked:
 Sua madre chiese:                  │
                                    │
 Cos’è successo? Che Dio ci guardi  │“What has happened? God guard us
 dalle disgrazie!                   │from misfortune!”
                                    │
 Susanna mosse le labbra. Non ne    │Susan moved her lips. No sound
 uscì alcun suono. Madame Levaille  │came. Madame Levaille stepped up to
 andò alla figlia, la prese pel     │her daughter, took her by the arm,
 braccio, la guardò in viso.        │looked into her face.
                                    │
 In nome di Dio, ella balbettò, che │“In God’s name,” she said shakily,
 c’è? Ti sei rotolata nel fango...  │“what’s the matter? You have been
 Perchè sei venuta?... Dov’è Jean?  │rolling in mud.... Why did you
                                    │come?... Where’s Jean?”
                                    │
 Gli uomini s’eran tutti alzati     │The men had all got up and
 avvicinandosi lentamente, cogli    │approached slowly, staring with
 occhi spalancati di stupidità      │dull surprise. Madame Levaille
 sorpresa. Madame Levaille cacciò   │jerked her daughter away from the
 sua figlia dalla porta e la spinse │door, swung her round upon a seat
 su un sedile contro il muro. Poi si│close to the wall. Then she turned
 voltò aspramente agli uomini:      │fiercely to the men—
                                    │
 Basta ora! Andatevene—voialtri! Io │“Enough of this! Out you go—you
 chiudo.                            │others! I close.”
                                    │
 Uno di essi osservò, guardando     │One of them observed, looking down
 Susanna quasi fuor di sè, svenuta  │at Susan collapsed on the seat:
 sulla sedia: Essa è—come chi       │“She is—one may say—half dead.”
 dicesse—mezza morta.               │
                                    │
 Madame Levaille spalancò la porta: │Madame Levaille flung the door
                                    │open.
                                    │
 Fuori! Marche! ella gridò con un   │“Get out! March!” she cried,
 tremore nervoso.                   │shaking nervously.
                                    │
 Essi uscirono uno ad uno nella     │They dropped out into the night,
 notte, ridendo stupidamente. Fuori,│laughing stupidly. Outside, the two
 i due Lotari scoppiarono in grida  │Lotharios broke out into loud
 violente. Gli altri cercarono di   │shouts. The others tried to soothe
 calmarli, parlando tutti insieme.  │them, all talking at once.
                                    │
 Il rumore si perdette pel vicolo   │The noise went away up the lane
 assieme agli uomini, traballanti in│with the men, who staggered
 un sol gruppo serrato e            │together in a tight knot,
 incolpandosene stupidamente l’un   │remonstrating with one another
 l’altro.                           │foolishly.
                                    │
 Parla, Susanna. Che c’è?           │“Speak, Susan. What is it? Speak!”
 Parla!—supplicò Madame Levaille,   │entreated Madame Levaille, as soon
 appena chiusa la porta.            │as the door was shut.
                                    │
 Susanna pronunciò qualche parola   │Susan pronounced some
 incomprensibile, con terribile     │incomprehensible words, glaring at
 fissità di sguardo alla tavola. La │the table. The old woman clapped
 vecchia picchiò insieme in alto le │her hands above her head, let them
 mani, le lasciò cadere, e rimase a │drop, and stood looking at her
 guardare la figlia con occhi       │daughter with disconsolate eyes.
 sgomenti.                          │
                                    │
 Suo marito era stato “un po’ tocco │Her husband had been “deranged in
 al cervello” per qualche anno,     │his head” for a few years before he
 avanti di morire, ed ora cominciava│died, and now she began to suspect
 a sospettare che sua figlia pure   │her daughter was going mad. She
 stesse ammattendo. Le domandò,     │asked, pressingly:
 facendole pressione:               │
                                    │
 Lo sa Jean dove sei? Dov’è Jean?   │“Does Jean know where you are?
                                    │Where is Jean?”
                                    │
 Susanna pronunciò con difficoltà:  │Susan pronounced with difficulty—
                                    │
 Lo sa... egli è morto.             │“He knows ... he is dead.”
                                    │
 Che? gridò la vecchia. Ella        │“What!” cried the old woman. She
 s’appressò ancora, e spiando in    │came up near, and peering at her
 faccia la figlia ripetè tre volte: │daughter, repeated three times:
 Che dici? Che dici? Che dici?      │“What do you say? What do you say?
                                    │What do you say?”
                                    │
 Susanna sedeva a ciglio asciutto e │Susan sat dry-eyed and stony before
 impietrata davanti a Madame        │Madame Levaille, who contemplated
 Levaille, che la contemplava,      │her, feeling a strange sense of
 sentendo uno strano senso          │inexplicable horror creep into the
 d’inesplicabile orrore serpeggiare │silence of the house.
 nel silenzio della casa.           │
                                    │
 Ella non s’era quasi resa conto    │She had hardly realized the news,
 della notizia, al di là del capire │further than to understand that she
 ch’ella era stata portata in un    │had been brought in one short
 attimo faccia a faccia con         │moment face to face with something
 qualchecosa di inatteso e di       │unexpected and final.
 decisivo.                          │
                                    │
 Non le veniva neanche alla mente di│It did not even occur to her to ask
 chiedere spiegazioni. Ella pensava:│for any explanation. She thought:
 accidente—terribile                │accident—terrible accident—blood to
 accidente—sangue alla testa—caduto │the head—fell down a trap door in
 in un trabocchetto in soffitta...  │the loft....
                                    │
 Rimase lì astratta e muta,         │She remained there, distracted and
 sbattendo i suoi vecchi occhi.     │mute, blinking her old eyes.
                                    │
 Improvvisamente Susanna disse:     │Suddenly, Susan said:
                                    │
 L’ho ucciso io!                    │“I have killed him.”
                                    │
 Per un attimo la madre rimase      │For a moment the mother stood
 immobile, quasi senza respiro, ma  │still, almost unbreathing, but with
 con faccia impassibile. Ma subito  │composed face. The next second she
 dopo scoppiò in un grido:          │burst out into a shout:
                                    │
 Tu, pazza di una donna... Ti       │“You miserable madwoman ... they
 taglieranno il collo!...           │will cut your neck....”
                                    │
 Immaginò subito i gendarmi entrando│She fancied the gendarmes entering
 in casa sua e dicendole: Vogliamo  │the house, saying to her: “We want
 vostra figlia; datecela—I gendarmi,│your daughter; give her up”: the
 con quella faccia severa e rigida  │gendarmes with the severe, hard
 degli uomini che compiono un       │faces of men on duty.
 mandato.                           │
                                    │
 Ella conosceva bene il brigadiere, │She knew the brigadier well—an old
 un vecchio amico familiare e       │friend, familiar and respectful,
 rispettoso, che diceva             │saying heartily, “To your good
 cordialmente: Alla vostra salute,  │health, madame!” before lifting to
 signora!—prima di alzare alle      │his lips the small glass of
 labbra il bicchierino del          │cognac—out of the special bottle
 cognac—quello della bottiglia      │she kept for friends.
 speciale messa in serbo per gli    │
 amici.                             │
                                    │
 Ed ora?... Ella ci perdeva la      │And now!... She was losing her
 testa. Ella si mise a correre di   │head. She rushed here and there, as
 qua e di là, come cercando qualche │if looking for something urgently
 cosa d’immediata necessità—smise,  │needed—gave that up, stood stock
 rimase immobile nel centro della   │still in the middle of the room,
 stanza, e strillò alla figlia:     │and screamed at her daughter:
                                    │
 Perchè? Dillo! Dillo! Perchè?      │“Why? Say! Say! Why?”
                                    │
 L’altra sembrò guizzar fuori dalla │The other seemed to leap out of her
 sua strana apatia:                 │strange apathy.
                                    │
 Credi che io sia di sasso? strillò │“Do you think I am made of stone?”
 in risposta, buttandosi verso sua  │she shouted back, striding toward
 madre.                             │her mother.
                                    │
 No! È impossibile... disse Madame  │“No! It’s impossible ...” said
 Levaille con tono di assoluta      │Madame Levaille, in a convinced
 convinzione.                       │tone.
                                    │
 Andate dunque a vedere, mamma,     │“You go and see, mother,” retorted
 rispose in cambio Susanna,         │Susan, looking at her with blazing
 guardandola con occhi accesi. Non  │eyes. “There’s no mercy in
 c’è misericordia nel cielo—nè      │heaven—no justice. No!... I did not
 giustizia. No!... Non sapevo...    │know.... Do you think I have no
 Credete che io non abbia cuore?    │heart?
                                    │
 Credete voi che io non abbia mai   │“Do you think I have never heard
 udito la gente schernirmi,         │people jeering at me, pitying me,
 compiangermi, farsi stupore di     │wondering at me?
 me?...                             │
                                    │
 Sapete come qualcuno mi chiamava?  │“Do you know how some of them were
 La madre degli idioti—quello era il│calling me? The mother of
 mio soprannome! E i miei figli non │idiots—that was my nickname! And my
 mi conosceranno mai, non mi        │children never would know me, never
 parleranno mai; non conosceranno   │speak to me. They would know
 niente, nè uomini, nè Dio.         │nothing; neither men—nor God.
                                    │
 Non ho dunque io pregato! Ma la    │“Haven’t I prayed! But the Mother
 Madre stessa di Dio non ha voluto  │of God herself would not hear me. A
 udirmi. Una madre!...              │mother!...
                                    │
 Chi è maledetto—io, o quell’uomo   │“Who is accursed—I, or the man who
 che è morto? Eh? Ditemelo. Io badai│is dead? Eh? Tell me.  I took care
 a me. Credete che io avrei sfidato │of myself. Do you think I would
 il furore di Dio e riempito la casa│defy the anger of God and have my
 di quegli esseri, che sono peggio  │house full of those things—that are
 di bestie, le quali conoscono      │worse than animals who know the
 almeno la mano che li sfama?       │hand that feeds them?
                                    │
 Chi bestemmiò nella notte, fin     │“Who blasphemed in the night at the
 sulla porta stessa della chiesa?   │very church door? Was it I?... I
 Fui io?... Io piansi solamente e   │only wept and prayed for mercy ...
 implorai misericordia... e sento   │and I feel the curse at every
 invece la maledizione ad ogni      │moment of the day—I see it round me
 momento del giorno—me la vedo      │from morning to night.... I’ve got
 d’intorno da mattina a sera... La  │to keep them alive—to take care of
 mia missione è di tenerli in       │my misfortune and shame.
 vita—di dar dietro alla mia mala   │
 sorte ed alla mia vergogna...      │
                                    │
 E lui veniva. Io imploravo         │“And he would come. I begged him
 misericordia da lui e dal cielo. Ma│and Heaven for mercy.... No!...
 niente!... Ebbene, allora          │Then we shall see....
 vedremo!...                        │
                                    │
 Stasera venne. Pensai tra me: Ah,  │“He came this evening. I thought to
 di nuovo! Avevo le mie lunghe      │myself: ‘Ah! again!’... I had my
 forbici. Lo sentii vociare... Me lo│long scissors. I heard him
 vidi vicino... Devo? Veramente?    │shouting.... I saw him near.... I
 Piglia, dunque!...                 │must—must I?... Then take!...
                                    │
 E lo colpii alla gola sopra l’osso │“And I struck him in the throat
 del petto... Non diede neanche un  │above the breast-bone.... I never
 sospiro. Lo lasciai in piedi...    │heard him even sigh.... I left him
 Sarà un minuto. Come ho fatto a    │standing.... It was a minute ago.
 venire?                            │How did I come here?”
                                    │
 Madame Levaille rabbrividì. Un     │Madame Levaille shivered. A wave of
 fremito gelato le corse la schiena,│cold ran down her back, down her
 le braccia grasse dentro le maniche│fat arms under her tight sleeves,
 strette, le fece involontariamente │made her stamp gently where she
 battere i piedi. Dei fremiti le    │stood. Quivers ran over the broad
 agitavano le grasse guancie, le    │cheeks, across the thin lips, ran
 labbra sottili, le rughe agli      │amongst the wrinkles at the corners
 angoli dei suoi vecchi occhi fissi.│of her steady old eyes. She
 Ella balbettò:                     │stammered:
                                    │
 Ah! donna perversa—tu mi           │“You wicked woman—you disgrace me.
 disonori... Ma già! Tu hai sempre  │But there! You always resembled
 assomigliato a tuo padre! Cosa     │your father. What do you think will
 credi che ne addiverrà di te...    │become of you ... in the other
 nell’ altro mondo? In questo... Oh │world? In this.... Oh misery!”
 sciagura!                          │
                                    │
 Ora le aveva preso un gran caldo.  │She was very hot now. She felt
 Le pareva di abbruciare dentro. Si │burning inside. She wrung her
 torse le mani umide di sudore—e ad │perspiring hands—and suddenly,
 un tratto, saltando su di scatto,  │starting in great haste, began to
 cominciò à cercare il suo pesante  │look for her big shawl and
 scialle e l’ombrello, febbrilmente,│umbrella, feverishly, never once
 non guardando neppure una volta sua│glancing at her daughter, who stood
 figlia, che stava nel mezzo della  │in the middle of the room following
 stanza, seguendola macchinalmente  │her with a gaze distracted and
 con sguardo atono.                 │cold.
                                    │
 Niente di peggio che in questo!    │“Nothing worse than in this,” said
 disse Susanna.                     │Susan.
                                    │
 Sua madre, coll’ombrello in mano e │Her mother, umbrella in hand and
 trascicando lo scialle pel         │trailing the shawl over the floor,
 pavimento, gemette profondamente.  │groaned profoundly.
                                    │
 Bisogna che vada dal curato,       │“I must go to the priest,” she
 scoppiò con veemenza. Non so       │burst out passionately. “I do not
 neppure se tu dica il vero! Sei una│know whether you even speak the
 donna che fai orrore. Ti           │truth! You are a horrible woman.
 rintracceranno in qualsiasi luogo. │They will find you anywhere. You
 Puoi star qui—o andartene. Non c’è │may stay here—or go. There is no
 posto per te in questo mondo...    │room for you in this world.”
                                    │
 Pronta ora a partire, ella girovagò│Ready now to depart, she yet
 ancora senza scopo per la stanza,  │wandered aimlessly about the room,
 mettendo le bottiglie sullo        │putting the bottles on the shelf,
 scaffale, cercando di mandare a    │trying to fit with trembling hands
 posto colle sue mani tremanti i    │the covers on cardboard boxes.
 coperchi delle scatole di cartone. │
                                    │
 Quando, per caso, il senso reale di│Whenever the real sense of what she
 ciò che aveva udito s’affacciava un│had heard emerged for a second from
 attimo fra i vapori densi dei suoi │the haze of her thoughts she would
 pensieri, ella pensava subito che  │fancy that something had exploded
 qualchecosa aveva esploso nel suo  │in her brain without,
 cervello, senza, per disgrazia, far│unfortunately, bursting her head to
 scoppiare in pezzi la sua testa—ciò│pieces—which would have been a
 che avrebbe messo fine alla sua    │relief.
 angoscia.                          │
                                    │
 Soffiò nelle candele una ad una    │She blew the candles out one by one
 senza rendersene conto, e fu       │without knowing it, and was
 terribilmente impressionata        │horribly startled by the darkness.
 dall’oscurità. Cadde su una panca e│She fell on a bench and began to
 cominciò a gemere.                 │whimper.
                                    │
 Dopo un po’ smise e rimase ad      │After a while she ceased, and sat
 ascoltare il respiro della figlia, │listening to the breathing of her
 che poteva appena vedere, diritta  │daughter, whom she could hardly
 ed immobile, senz’altro segno di   │see, still and upright, giving no
 vita che quello.                   │other sign of life.
                                    │
 In quei pochi minuti si sentì venir│She was becoming old rapidly at
 decrepita. Parlò in toni incerti,  │last, during those minutes. She
 spezzati dal battere dei denti,    │spoke in tones unsteady, cut about
 come uno scosso da un freddo di    │by the rattle of teeth, like one
 morte, in un accesso di febbre.    │shaken by a deadly cold fit of
                                    │ague.
                                    │
 Vorrei che tu fossi morta bambina. │“I wish you had died little. I will
 Non oserò mai più mostrare la mia  │never dare to show my old head in
 vecchia testa nel sole! Ci sono    │the sunshine again. There are worse
 disgrazie peggiori di quella d’aver│misfortunes than idiot children. I
 dei figlioli idioti... Vorrei che  │wish you had been born to me
 tu stessa mi fossi nata scema...   │simple—like your own....”
 come i tuoi...                     │
                                    │
 Ella vide la figura della figlia   │She saw the figure of her daughter
 passare davanti al debole e livido │pass before the faint and livid
 chiarore di una finestra. Poi essa │clearness of a window. Then it
 apparve un attimo sulla soglia, e  │appeared in the doorway for a
 la porta sbattè.                   │second, and the door swung to with
                                    │a clang.
                                    │
 Madame Levaille, svegliata dal     │Madame Levaille, as if awakened by
 rumore come da un lungo incubo, si │the noise from a long nightmare,
 precipitò fuori.                   │rushed out.
                                    │
 Susanna! urlò dalla soglia.        │“Susan!” she shouted from the
                                    │doorstep.
                                    │
 Ella udì un sasso rotolare         │She heard a stone roll a long time
 lungamente giù pel declivio della  │down the declivity of the rocky
 costa rocciosa al di sopra della   │beach above the sands. She stepped
 spiaggia. Fece qualche passo con   │forward cautiously, one hand on the
 prudenza, colla mano sul muro della│wall of the house, and peered down
 casa, e spiò giù per le immote     │into the smooth darkness of the
 tenebre della baia deserta.        │empty bay.
                                    │
 Gridò ancora:                      │Once again she cried:
                                    │
 Susanna! là ti ammazzerai!         │“Susan! You will kill yourself
                                    │there.”
                                    │
 Il sasso aveva fatto il suo ultimo │The stone had taken its last leap
 salto nel buio, ed ora ella non udì│in the dark, and she heard nothing
 più nulla.                         │now.
                                    │
 Un pensiero improvviso parve       │A sudden thought seemed to strangle
 strozzarla, e non chiamò più. Volse│her, and she called no more. She
 la schiena al silenzio nero        │turned her back upon the black
 dell’abisso, e s’avviò pel vicolo  │silence of the pit and went up the
 verso Ploumar, camminando e        │lane towards Ploumar, stumbling
 inciampando, nella sua cupa        │along with sombre determination, as
 determinazione, come se ella fosse │if she had started on a desperate
 partita per un viaggio disperato,  │journey that would last, perhaps,
 che avrebbe durato, forse, fino al │to the end of her life.
 termine della sua vita.            │
                                    │
 Un periodico stizzoso fragore di   │A sullen and periodic clamour of
 onde rotolantisi sugli scogli la   │waves rolling over reefs followed
 seguì a lungo mentr’ella camminava │her far inland between the high
 verso il paese, fra le alte siepi  │hedges sheltering the gloomy
 che nascondevano la cupa solitudine│solitude of the fields.
 dei campi.                         │
                                    │
 Susanna era corsa fuori, svoltando │Susan had run out, swerving sharp
 netto a sinistra fuor della porta, │to the left at the door, and on the
 e sull’orlo del pendio s’era       │edge of the slope crouched down
 accovacciata dietro un masso. Una  │behind a boulder. A dislodged stone
 pietra smossa era rotolata in giù, │went on downwards, rattling as it
 crosciando nei suoi sobbalzi.      │leaped.
                                    │
 Quando Madame Levaille uscì a      │When Madame Levaille called out,
 chiamare, Susanna avrebbe potuto,  │Susan could have, by stretching her
 stendendo la mano, toccar la gonna │hand, touched her mother’s skirt,
 di sua madre, se avesse avuto il   │had she had the courage to move a
 coraggio di muover membro. Vide la │limb. She saw the old woman go
 vecchia andarsene, ed ella rimase  │away, and she remained still,
 ferma, chiudendo gli occhi e       │closing her eyes and pressing her
 premendo il fianco sulla superficie│side to the hard and rugged surface
 dura e scabra della rupe.          │of the rock.
                                    │
 Dopo un poco, un volto ben noto con│After a while a familiar face with
 occhi fissi e bocca spalancata, le │fixed eyes and an open mouth became
 si rese visibile fra l’intensa     │visible in the intense obscurity
 oscurità dei massi. Ella gettò un  │amongst the boulders. She uttered a
 grido sommesso e s’alzò.           │low cry and stood up.
                                    │
 La faccia svanì, lasciandola       │The face vanished, leaving her to
 ansante e tremante, nella          │gasp and shiver alone in the
 desolazione di quei mucchi di      │wilderness of stone heaps. But as
 macigni. Ma non appena ella si     │soon as she had crouched down again
 accovacciò di nuovo in una         │to rest, with her head against the
 necessità di riposo, colla testa   │rock, the face returned, came very
 appoggiata alla rupe, la faccia    │near, appeared eager to finish the
 tornò, si fece vicinissima, apparve│speech that had been cut short by
 ansiosa di terminare il colloquio  │death, only a moment ago.
 lasciato a mezzo dalla morte, era  │
 appena un secondo.                 │
                                    │
 Ella si rimise ratta in piedi e    │She scrambled quickly to her feet
 disse:                             │and said:
                                    │
 Va via, o lo faccio un’ altra      │“Go away, or I will do it again.”
 volta!                             │
                                    │
 La cosa ondeggiò, dondolò a destra,│The thing wavered, swung to the
 a sinistra. La donna si mosse da   │right, to the left. She moved this
 ogni parte, indietreggiò, le parve │way and that, stepped back, fancied
 di tirarle degli urlacci, ma fu    │herself screaming at it, and was
 stupefatta dell’intatta immobilità │appalled by the unbroken stillness
 della notte.                       │of the night.
                                    │
 Ella barcollò sulla ripa, sentì il │She tottered on the brink, felt the
 declivio scosceso sotto i suoi     │steep declivity under her feet, and
 piedi, e giù si precipitò alla     │rushed down blindly to save herself
 cieca, chè non si sarebbe salvata  │from a headlong fall.
 da una caduta a capofitto.         │
                                    │
 I fuochi della montagna parvero    │The shingle seemed to wake up; the
 svegliarsi; le selci cominciarono a│pebbles began to roll before her,
 rotolare davanti a lei, la         │pursued her from above, raced down
 perseguitarono dall’alto, corsero  │with her on both sides, rolling
 con lei ai suoi fianchi, la        │past with an increasing clatter.
 oltrepassarono con crescente       │
 scroscio.                          │
                                    │
 Nella pace della notte lo scroscio │In the peace of the night the noise
 crebbe nella consistenza di un     │grew, deepening to a rumour,
 fragore, continuo e violento, come │continuous and violent, as if the
 se l’intera chiostra delle roccie  │whole semicircle of the stony beach
 si fosse messa a rovina nella baia.│had started to tumble down into the
 I piedi di Susanna toccavano appena│bay. Susan’s feet hardly touched
 la costa, che sembrava precipitare │the slope that seemed to run down
 con lei.                           │with her.
                                    │
 Toccando il fondo inciampò, schizzò│At the bottom she stumbled, shot
 in avanti, colle braccia aperte, e │forward, throwing her arms out, and
 cadde pesantemente. Si rialzò di   │fell heavily. She jumped up at once
 scatto, e si voltò rapidamente a   │and turned swiftly to look back,
 guardar indietro, coi pugni che    │her clenched hands full of sand she
 stringevano la sabbia su cui le sue│had clutched in her fall.
 mani s’erano chiuse nella caduta.  │
                                    │
 La faccia era là, mantenendosi a   │The face was there, keeping its
 distanza, visibile nella sua       │distance, visible in its own sheen
 chiarità, che faceva nella notte   │that made a pale stain in the
 una macchia pallida. Ella gridò: Va│night. She shouted, “Go away”—she
 via! glielo gridò con angoscia, con│shouted at it with pain, with fear,
 terrore, con tutta la rabbia di    │with all the rage of that useless
 quell’inutile colpo inferto, che   │stab that could not keep him quiet,
 non aveva saputo acquietarlo per   │keep him out of her sight.
 sempre, allontanarlo per sempre dai│
 suoi occhi.                        │
                                    │
 Cosa voleva ora? Egli era morto!   │What did he want now? He was dead.
 Gli uomini morti non possono crear │Dead men have no children. Would he
 figlioli. Non l’avrebbe dunque egli│never leave her alone?
 lasciata mai in pace?...           │
                                    │
 Ella le avventò degli strilli—agitò│She shrieked at it—waved her
 contro a lei le mani tese. Le      │outstretched hands. She seemed to
 sembrò sentire il respiro delle    │feel the breath of parted lips,
 labbra socchiuse, e con un ululo   │and, with a long cry of
 scoraggito fuggì attraverso il     │discouragement, fled across the
 fondo piano della baia.            │level bottom of the bay.
                                    │
 Ella correva agile, senza concepire│She ran lightly, unaware of any
 lo sforzo del suo corpo. Alti      │effort of her body. High sharp
 scogli aguzzi, che, nell’ alta     │rocks that, when the bay is full,
 marea, si ergono sul piano         │show above the glittering plain of
 luccicante dell’acqua azzurra come │blue water like pointed towers of
 affilati campanili di chiese       │submerged churches, glided past
 sommerse, le scivolavano dinanzi,  │her, rushing to the land at a
 precipitandosi a terra con tremenda│tremendous pace.
 violenza.                          │
                                    │
 A sinistra in distanza, ella potè  │To the left, in the distance, she
 vedere qualchecosa di scintillante:│could see something shining: a
 un grande disco di luce in cui     │broad disc of light in which narrow
 piccole ombre puntavano al centro  │shadows pivoted round the centre
 come raggi di una ruota.           │like the spokes of a wheel.
                                    │
 Udì una voce chiamare: Ohe là! e   │She heard a voice calling, “Hey!
 rispose con un grido selvaggio.    │There!” and answered with a wild
 Dunque egli poteva anche           │scream. So, he could call yet! He
 chiamare!... La chiamava perchè si │was calling after her to stop.
 fermasse... Mai!...                │Never!...
                                    │
 Ella continuò a squarciare la notte│She tore through the night, past
 e passò il gruppo sbigottito dei   │the startled group of
 raccoglitori d’alghe che rimasero  │seaweed-gatherers who stood round
 intorno alla loro lanterna         │their lantern paralysed with fear
 paralizzati dallo spavento, allo   │at the unearthly screech coming
 strido inumano che veniva da       │from that fleeing shadow.
 quell’ombra fuggente.              │
                                    │
 Gli uomini si chinarono sui loro   │The men leaned on their pitchforks
 forconi con occhi grandi di        │staring fearfully. A woman fell on
 terrore. Una donna cadde a         │her knees, and, crossing herself,
 ginocchio, e, segnandosi, cominciò │began to pray aloud. A little girl
 à pregare ad alta voce. Una        │with her ragged skirt full of slimy
 ragazzetta, colla sua cenciosa     │seaweed began to sob despairingly,
 gonnella piena di alghe viscide,   │lugging her soaked burden close to
 cominciò a singhiozzare            │the man who carried the light.
 disperatamente, trascicandosi il   │
 suo fardello fradicio strinto      │
 all’uomo che portava la lanterna.  │
                                    │
 Qualcuno disse: Quella cosa è corsa│Somebody said: “The thing ran out
 verso il mare.                     │towards the sea.”
                                    │
 Un’altra voce esclamò: E il mare si│Another voice exclaimed: “And the
 alza di nuovo. Guardate le pozze   │sea is coming back! Look at the
 d’acqua come si allargano. O donna │spreading puddles. Do you hear—you
 là, non sentite! Su, alzatevi!     │woman—there! Get up!”
                                    │
 Parecchie voci gridarono insieme:  │Several voices cried together.
 Sì, andiamo via! Che la cosa       │“Yes, let us be off! Let the
 maledetta vada al mare!            │accursed thing go to the sea!”
                                    │
 Essi avanzarono, tenendosi serrati │They moved on, keeping close round
 intorno al lume.                   │the light.
                                    │
 Ad un tratto un uomo bestemmiò     │Suddenly a man swore loudly. He
 forte. Sarebbe andato lui a vedere │would go and see what was the
 di cosa si trattava. Quella era    │matter. It had been a woman’s
 stata una voce di donna! Andrebbe  │voice. He would go.
 lui.                               │
                                    │
 Ci furono acute proteste da parte  │There were shrill protests from
 delle donne—ma la sua alta forma si│women—but his high form detached
 staccò dal gruppo e se ne andò di  │itself from the group and went off
 corsa. Ci fu un unanime richiamo di│running. They sent a unanimous call
 voci atterrite dietro a lui. Una   │of scared voices after him. A word,
 parola insultante e beffarda venne │insulting and mocking, came back,
 di ritorno, lanciata attraverso le │thrown at them through darkness.
 tenebre.                           │
                                    │
 Una donna gemette. Un vecchio disse│A woman moaned. An old man said
 gravemente: Tali cose dovrebbero   │gravely: “Such things ought to be
 lasciarsi abbandonate a sè stesse! │left alone.”
                                    │
 Essi avanzarono più lentamente,    │They went on slower, shuffling in
 arrembando sulla sabbia che cedeva,│the yielding sand and whispering to
 susurrandosi l’uno all’altro che   │one another that Millot feared
 Millot non aveva paura di niente,  │nothing, having no religion, but
 perchè non aveva religione, ma che │that it would end badly some day.
 finirebbe male un giorno o l’altro.│
                                    │
 Susanna incontrò la marea che      │Susan met the incoming tide by the
 saliva presso l’isoletta del Corvo │Raven islet and stopped, panting,
 e si fermò, ansante, coi piedi     │with her feet in the water.
 nell’acqua.                        │
                                    │
 Udì il mormorio e sentì la frigida │She heard the murmur and felt the
 carezza del mare, e, più calma ora,│cold caress of the sea, and, calmer
 potè vedere la cupa massa confusa  │now, could see the sombre and
 del Corvo da una parte e la bianca │confused mass of the Raven on one
 e lunga striscia delle secche di   │side and on the other the long
 Molène dall’altra, che ad ogni     │white streak of Molène sands that
 bassa marea s’elevano alte sopra il│are left high above the dry bottom
 fondo asciutto della Baia di       │of Fougère Bay at every ebb.
 Fougère.                           │
                                    │
 Si rigirò e vide lontano, sullo    │She turned round and saw far away,
 sfondo stellato del cielo, il      │along the starred background of the
 frastagliato profilo della costa.  │sky, the ragged outline of the
                                    │coast.
                                    │
 Sopra di esso, quasi in faccia a   │Above it, nearly facing her,
 lei, appariva il campanile della   │appeared the tower of Ploumar
 chiesa di Ploumar; piramide alta e │Church; a slender and tall pyramid
 sottile, ergentesi cupa ed aguzza  │shooting up dark and pointed into
 nel luccichio serrato delle stelle.│the clustered glitter of the stars.
                                    │
 Ella si sentì stranamente calma. Si│She felt strangely calm. She knew
 rendeva conto di dov’era e         │where she was, and began to
 cominciava a ricordarsi come c’era │remember how she came there—and
 venuta—e perchè. Ella spiò         │why. She peered into the smooth
 nell’immota oscurità che           │obscurity near her. She was alone.
 l’avvolgeva. Era sola. Non c’era   │There was nothing there; nothing
 niente là: niente vicino a lei,    │near her, either living or dead.
 vivo o morto.                      │
                                    │
 La marea s’insinuava dolcemente,   │The tide was creeping in quietly,
 spingendo in avanti, come lunghe   │putting out long impatient arms of
 braccia impazienti, strani         │strange rivulets that ran toward
 rivoletti che correvano verso terra│the land between ridges of sand.
 fra rialzi di sabbia. Colla notte  │Under the night the pools grew
 le pozze ingrossavano con          │bigger with mysterious rapidity,
 misteriosa rapidità, mentre il     │while the great sea, yet far off,
 vasto mare, ancora lontano,        │thundered in a regular rhythm along
 rumoreggiava con ritmo regolare    │the indistinct line of the horizon.
 lungo la linea indistinta          │
 dell’orizzonte.                    │
                                    │
 Susanna indietreggiò per qualche   │Susan splashed her way back for a
 metro, facendo schizzare l’acqua,  │few yards without being able to get
 senza pertanto riuscire a tirarsene│clear of the water that murmured
 fuori, e sentendosela mormorare    │tenderly all around and, suddenly,
 lusingatrice d’intorno, mentre ad  │with a spiteful gurgle, nearly took
 un tratto, con dispettoso          │her off her feet.
 gorgoglio, le trascinò quasi via i │
 piedi.                             │
                                    │
 Il cuore le diede un tuffo di      │Her heart thumped with fear. This
 paura. Quel luogo era troppo grande│place was too big and too empty to
 e deserto per morirvi dentro. Il   │die in. To-morrow they would do
 domani avrebbero fatto di lei ciò  │with her what they liked. But
 che loro pareva. Ma prima di morire│before she died she must tell
 voleva spiegar loro... a quei      │them—tell the gentlemen in black
 signori con vesti nere, che ci sono│clothes that there are things no
 al mondo delle cose che nessuna    │woman can bear. She must explain
 donna può sopportare. Bisognava    │how it happened....
 ch’ella spiegasse com’era andata la│
 cosa...                            │
                                    │
 Traversò una pozza a guazzo,       │She splashed through a pool,
 schizzandosi fino alla cintola,    │getting wet to the waist, too
 troppo immersa nei suoi pensieri   │preoccupied to care.... She must
 per avvedersene... Bisognava       │explain.
 ch’ella spiegasse.                 │
                                    │
 Egli entrò coi suoi soliti modi e  │“He came in the same way as ever
 disse proprio così: Credi tu che io│and said, just so: ‘Do you think I
 voglia lasciar il mio podere a     │am going to leave the land to those
 quella gente di Morbihan che non   │people from Morbihan that I do not
 conosco? Credi proprio questo? Ah, │know? Do you? We shall see! Come
 vedremo!... Vieni creatura del     │along, you creature of mischance!’
 male!                              │
                                    │
 E stese le braccia. Allora,        │“And he put his arms out. Then,
 Signori, io dissi Davanti a Dio,   │Messieurs, I said: ‘Before
 mai!                               │God—never!’
                                    │
 Ed egli disse avanzando a gran     │“And he said, striding at me with
 passi e colle palme aperte: Non c’è│open palms: ‘There is no God to
 Dio che mi tenga! Capisci, inutile │hold me! Do you understand, you
 carcassa? Farò quel che mi piace. E│useless carcase. I will do what I
 mi prese per le spalle.            │like.’ And he took me by the
                                    │shoulders.
                                    │
 Allora io, Signori, chiamai Dio in │“Then I, Messieurs, called to God
 aiuto, e nell’attimo seguente,     │for help, and next minute, while he
 mentr’egli mi scoteva, mi sentii le│was shaking me, I felt my long
 mie lunghe forbici in mano. La sua │scissors in my hand. His shirt was
 camicia era slacciata, e al lume   │unbuttoned, and, by the
 della candela io vidi la cavità    │candle-light, I saw the hollow of
 della gola.                        │his throat.
                                    │
 Gridai: Lascia andare! Egli mi     │“I cried: ‘Let go!’ He was crushing
 stritolava le spalle. Era forte, il│my shoulders. He was strong, my man
 mio uomo! Allora io pensai: No!... │was! Then I thought: No!... Must
 Devo farlo?... Prendi, dunque! e   │I?... Then take!—and I struck in
 colpii in quella cavità.           │the hollow place.
                                    │
 Non l’ho visto cadere. No! No!...  │“I never saw him fall. Never!
 Non l’ho visto cadere... Il vecchio│Never!... Never saw him fall....
 babbo non voltò mai la testa. È    │The old father never turned his
 sordo e rimbambito, Signori...     │head. He is deaf and childish,
 Nessuno l’ha visto cadere. Io corsi│gentlemen.... Nobody saw him fall.
 fuori... Nessuno vide...           │I ran out.... Nobody saw....”
                                    │
 S’era arrampicata fra gli scogli   │She had been scrambling amongst the
 del Corvo, ed ora si trovò, tutta  │boulders of the Raven and now found
 senza fiato, fra le dense ombre    │herself, all out of breath,
 dell’isoletta rocciosa.            │standing amongst the heavy shadows
                                    │of the rocky islet.
                                    │
 Il Corvo è unito alla terra ferma  │The Raven is connected with the
 da una scogliera di macigni immensi│mainland by a natural pier of
 e lubrichi. Pensò di ritornare a   │immense and slippery stones. She
 casa da quella parte. Ch’egli fosse│intended to return home that way.
 sempre là in piedi?... A casa.     │Was he still standing there? At
 Quale casa! Quattro idioti ed un   │home. Home! Four idiots and a
 cadavere. Ella doveva tornare per  │corpse. She must go back and
 spiegare. Tutti capirebbero.       │explain. Anybody would
                                    │understand....
                                    │
 Sotto a lei, la notte od il mare   │Below her the night or the sea
 parve pronunciare distintamente:   │seemed to pronounce distinctly:
                                    │
 Aha! Ti vedo finalmente!           │“Aha! I see you at last!”
                                    │
 Ella sussultò, scivolò, cadde; e   │She started, slipped, fell; and
 senza tentare di rialzarsi, ascoltò│without attempting to rise,
 esterrefatta. Udì un respiro       │listened, terrified. She heard
 pesante, un risonare di zoccoli di │heavy breathing, a clatter of
 legno. Poi più nulla.              │wooden clogs. It stopped.
                                    │
 Da dove diavolo sei passata? disse │“Where the devil did you pass?”
 un uomo invisibile, con voce rauca.│said an invisible man, hoarsely.
                                    │
 Ella tenne il fiato. Riconobbe la  │She held her breath. She recognized
 voce. Ella non l’aveva visto       │the voice. She had not seen him
 cadere. Stava egli, morto,         │fall. Was he pursuing her there
 perseguitandola fin lì, o forse... │dead, or perhaps ... alive?
 vivo?                              │
                                    │
 Ella perse la testa. Gridò dal     │She lost her head. She cried from
 crepaccio dove s’era calcata: Mai, │the crevice where she lay huddled,
 mai!                               │“Never, never!”
                                    │
 Ah! Sei sempre lì! Me n’hai dato   │“Ah! You are still there. You led
 del filo da torcere! Aspetta, bella│me a fine dance. Wait, my beauty, I
 mia, ti voglio un po’ veder bene   │must see how you look after all
 adesso. Aspetta...                 │this. You wait....”
                                    │
 Millot inciampava, rideva,         │Millot was stumbling, laughing,
 bestemmiava senza pórci caso, di   │swearing meaninglessly out of pure
 pura soddisfazione, pago di sè     │satisfaction, pleased with himself
 stesso per aver acchiappato quella │for having run down that
 notturna preda.                    │fly-by-night.
                                    │
 Come se i fantasmi esistessero!    │“As if there were such things as
 Bah! Ci voleva un vecchio soldato  │ghosts! Bah! It took an old African
 d’Africa, per mostrare a quegli    │soldier to show those
 zotici... Ma è curioso! Chi diavolo│clodhoppers.... But it was curious.
 era?                               │Who the devil was she?”
                                    │
 Susanna ascoltava accovacciata.    │Susan listened, crouching. He was
 Egli veniva a cercarla, il morto.  │coming for her, this dead man.
 Non c’era via di scampo. Che rumore│There was no escape. What a noise
 faceva fra le pietre!...           │he made amongst the stones....
                                    │
 Ella vide sorgere la testa, poi le │She saw his head rise up, then the
 spalle. Era alto, il suo uomo! Le  │shoulders. He was tall—her own man!
 sue lunghe braccia brancolavano    │His long arms waved about, and it
 intorno, ed era proprio la sua     │was his own voice sounding a little
 voce, che suonava però un poco     │strange ... because of the
 strana... a causa delle forbici.   │scissors.
                                    │
 Ella si arrampicò lesta per uscire,│She scrambled out quickly, rushed
 si precipitò fino all’orlo della   │to the edge of the causeway, and
 scogliera, e girò. L’uomo stava    │turned round. The man stood still
 immobile sovra un alto scoglio,    │on a high stone, detaching himself
 staccando come un’ombra opaca sullo│in dead black on the glitter of the
 scintillio del cielo.              │sky.
                                    │
 Dove vai?—egli le urlò in malo     │“Where are you going to?” he called
 modo.                              │roughly.
                                    │
 Ella rispose: A casa! e lo guardò  │She answered, “Home!” and watched
 intensamente. Egli spiccò un salto │him intensely. He made a striding,
 greve da uno scoglio all’altro, e  │clumsy leap on to another boulder,
 si fermò di nuovo per riprender    │and stopped again, balancing
 l’equilibrio, poi disse:           │himself, then said:
                                    │
 Ha! Ha! Ebbene, vengo con te. È il │“Ha! ha! Well, I am going with you.
 meno che io possa fare. Ha! ha! ha!│It’s the least I can do. Ha! ha!
                                    │ha!”
                                    │
 Ella gli spalancò gli occhi in     │She stared at him till her eyes
 faccia, fino a che essi parvero    │seemed to become glowing coals that
 divenire due carboni ardenti che la│burned deep into her brain, and yet
 bruciassero addentro nel suo       │she was in mortal fear of making
 cervello, premendola tuttavia il   │out the well-known features. Below
 terrore mortale di ravvisare i     │her the sea lapped softly against
 lineamenti ben noti. Sotto a lei il│the rock with a splash, continuous
 mare, continuo e carezzevole,      │and gentle.
 lambiva e spruzzava dolcemente la  │
 roccia.                            │
                                    │
 L’uomo disse, avanzando ancora di  │The man said, advancing another
 un passo:                          │step:
                                    │
 È per te che vengo. Che credi?     │“I am coming for you. What do you
                                    │think?”
                                    │
 Ella tremò. Era venuto per lei! Non│She trembled. Coming for her! There
 c’era scampo, nè pace, nè speranza!│was no escape, no peace, no hope.
 Ella si guardò intorno             │She looked round despairingly.
 disperatamente.                    │
                                    │
 Improvvisamente l’intera costa     │Suddenly the whole shadowy coast,
 oscura, le indistinte isolette, il │the blurred islets, the heaven
 cielo stesso, ondeggiarono per due │itself, swayed about twice, then
 volte, poi si arrestarono. Ella    │came to a rest. She closed her eyes
 chiuse gli occhi ed urlò:          │and shouted:
                                    │
 Aspetta almeno ch’io sia morta!    │“Can’t you wait till I am dead!”
                                    │
 Ella era scossa da un odio furioso │She was shaken by a furious hate
 contro quell’ombra che la          │for that shade that pursued her in
 perseguitava in questo mondo, senza│this world, unappeased even by
 che la morte ne avesse placata la  │death in its longing for an heir
 brama di un erede simile ai        │that would be like other people’s
 figlioli degli altri.              │children.
                                    │
 Eh! Cosa? disse Millot, tenendosi  │“Hey! What?” said Millot, keeping
 prudentemente a distanza. Si diceva│his distance prudently. He was
 intanto tra sè: Attenzione! Qualche│saying to himself: “Look out! Some
 pazza. Una disgrazia fa presto a   │lunatic. An accident happens soon.”
 succedere.                         │
                                    │
 Ella continuò selvaggiamente:      │She went on, wildly:
                                    │
 Io voglio vivere. Viver sola—per   │“I want to live. To live alone—for
 una settimana—per un giorno. Io    │a week—for a day. I must explain to
 devo spiegar loro... Ti farei a    │them.... I would tear you to
 pezzi, ti ammazzerei ancora venti  │pieces, I would kill you twenty
 volte di seguito, piuttosto di     │times over rather than let you
 lasciarmi toccare da te finchè sono│touch me while I live. How many
 in vita. Quante volte devo         │times must I kill you—you
 ucciderti, sacrilego! È Satana che │blasphemer! Satan sends you here. I
 ti manda. Ah, son dannata anch’    │am damned too!”
 io...                              │
                                    │
 Ma via! disse Millot, allarmato e  │“Come,” said Millot, alarmed and
 conciliante. Io son vivo,          │conciliating. “I am perfectly
 vivissimo!... Oh Dio!              │alive!... Oh, my God!”
                                    │
 Ella aveva strillato: Vivo! ed era │She had screamed, “Alive!” and at
 svanita all’istante dai suoi occhi,│once vanished before his eyes, as
 come se l’isoletta stessa si fosse │if the islet itself had swerved
 scartata da sotto i suoi piedi.    │aside from under her feet.
                                    │
 Millot si buttò in avanti e cadde  │Millot rushed forward, and fell
 proprio col mento sul margine.     │flat with his chin over the edge.
                                    │
 Giù, giù, in fondo, egli vide      │Far below he saw the water whitened
 l’acqua imbiancata dal dibattersi  │by her struggles, and heard one
 di lei, e udì un grido acuto       │shrill cry for help that seemed to
 d’aiuto, che parve gettato in alto │dart upwards along the
 lungo la faccia a perpendicolo     │perpendicular face of the rock, and
 della roccia, e lanciato diritto   │soar past, straight into the high
 ancora fino al cielo alto ed       │and impassive heaven.
 impassibile.                       │




                                   IV


 Madame Levaille sedeva a ciglio    │Madame Levaille sat, dry-eyed, on
 asciutto sull’erba breve del       │the short grass of the hill side,
 pendio, colle sue gambe massiccie  │with her thick legs stretched out,
 protese, e i suoi vecchi piedi     │and her old feet turned up in their
 volti all’insù, nelle loro scarpe  │black cloth shoes. Her clogs stood
 di panno nero. Le sue sopra scarpe │near by, and further off the
 di legno le stavano vicine, e più  │umbrella lay on the withered sward
 lontano l’ombrello giaceva         │like a weapon dropped from the
 sull’erba secca, come un’arma      │grasp of a vanquished warrior.
 caduta dal pugno di un guerriero   │
 vinto.                             │
                                    │
 Il marchese di Chavannes, a        │The Marquis of Chavanes, on
 cavallo, una mano inguantata sul   │horseback, one gloved hand on
 fianco, abassò gli occhi su lei    │thigh, looked down at her as she
 mentr’ella si alzava a fatica,     │got up laboriously, with groans.
 gemendo.                           │
                                    │
 Sulla stretta carreggiata dei carri│On the narrow track of the
 dell’alghe quattro uomini portavano│seaweed-carts four men were
 a terra il corpo di Susanna su una │carrying inland Susan’s body on a
 barella, mentre molti altri        │hand-barrow, while several others
 seguivano alla rinfusa. Madame     │straggled listlessly behind. Madame
 Levaille seguiva coll’occhio la    │Levaille looked after the
 processione.                       │procession.
                                    │
 Sì, Signor Marchese, ella disse    │“Yes, Monsieur le Marquis,” she
 pacatamente, nel suo tono calmo di │said dispassionately, in her usual
 vecchia donna ragionevole. C’è     │calm tone of a reasonable old
 della gente disgraziata su questa  │woman. “There are unfortunate
 terra. Io non ebbi che una figlia. │people on this earth. I had only
 Soltanto una! E quell’una non sarà │one child. Only one! And they won’t
 sepolta in terra consacrata!       │bury her in consecrated ground!”
                                    │
 I suoi occhi si empirono           │Her eyes filled suddenly, and a
 immediatamente, e un breve scroscio│short shower of tears rolled down
 di lacrime rotolò giù per le sue   │the broad cheeks. She pulled the
 grasse guancie. Ella si strinse    │shawl close about her. The Marquis
 tutta nel suo scialle. Il marchese │leaned slightly over in his saddle,
 si chinò leggermente sulla sella e │and said:
 disse:                             │
                                    │
 È molto triste. Capisco il vostro  │“It is very sad. You have all my
 dolore. Parlerò al curato. Ella era│sympathy. I shall speak to the
 indubbiamente pazza, e la caduta fu│Curé. She was unquestionably
 accidentale. Millot lo dice        │insane, and the fall was
 chiaramente. Buongiorno, Signora.  │accidental. Millot says so
                                    │distinctly. Good-day, Madame.”
                                    │
 E andò via al trotto, pensando tra │And he trotted off, thinking to
 sè: Designerò questa vecchia       │himself: I must get this old woman
 tutrice di quegli idioti e         │appointed guardian of those idiots,
 amministratrice del podere. Sarà   │and administrator of the farm. It
 sempre meglio che non aver qui uno │would be much better than having
 di quegli altri Bacadou, rosso     │here one of those other Bacadous,
 repubblicano magari, a portarmi la │probably a red republican,
 sovversione nel comune!            │corrupting my commune.


       _Printed in Great Britain by Turnbull & Spears, Edinburgh_

-----

Footnote 1:

  Ma Conrad scrive: “Io credo che in via generale si dia troppa
  importanza alle mie qualità ereditarie. Quanto a temperamento io sono
  molto più somigliante alla famiglia di mia madre.”

Footnote 2:

  But Mr Conrad writes: “I think too much is made of my heredity
  generally. Temperamentally I am much more like my mother’s family.”

Footnote 3:

  Ploumar è nome inventato. Il paesaggio che serve di sfondo alla
  novella è quello della costa settentrionale della Bretagna, nella
  vicinanza di Lannion (Côtes-du-Nord) dirimpetto a Ile Grande.

  Tréguier, paese natale di Renan, è una cittadina vicina al mare, circa
  dodici miglia da Lannion.

Footnote 4:

  Ploumar is an invented name. The scenery of the tale is that of the
  northern coast of Brittany, in the neighbourhood of Lannion
  (Côtes-du-Nord), opposite Ile Grande.

  Tréguier, the birthplace of Renan, is a small town near the sea, some
  twelve miles from Lannion.

Footnote 5:

  L’alga è largamente usata in Bretagna come concime. Essa, molto ricca
  di potassa, calce e acido fosforico, ha rimarchevoli qualità
  fertilizzanti alle quali è dovuta la lussureggiante “cintura dorata”
  che circonda per un dodici miglia la penisola. L’alga consiste di
  nastri lunghi da uno a due metri, che aderiscono alle roccie, dalle
  quali vengono strappate con rastrelli, a bassa marea. Viene usata dopo
  esser stata esposta all’aperto per qualche tempo, per lasciar modo
  alla pioggia di detergerne il sale da cui è impregnata. In alcuni
  distretti l’alga è dapprima usata come combustibile, le cui ceneri si
  usano poi come concime.

Footnote 6:

  Seaweed is largely used in Brittany as a manure. This seaweed, which
  is very rich in potash, in lime, and in phosphoric acid, has
  remarkable fertilizing qualities, to which is due the luxuriance of
  the ‘golden belt,’ about twelve miles broad, which surrounds the
  peninsula. The seaweed consists of ribbons from one to two yards long,
  clinging to the rocks, from which they are stripped with rakes at low
  tide. It is used after it has been exposed to the air for some time,
  to allow the rain to carry away the salt with which it is impregnated.
  In certain districts the seaweed is first used as fuel, the ashes
  being used as a fertilizer.

Footnote 7:

  La cornamusa bretone (_biniou_) è molto simile alla piva scozzese
  (_bagpipes_). Come questa, il biniou possiede parecchi ‘bordoni,’ che
  suonano la tonica e la dominante, ed anche una canna che dà la gamma
  imperfetta, caratteristica della musica celtica.

Footnote 8:

  The _biniou_ of Brittany is very similar to the Scotch bagpipes. Like
  the latter it has several drones, sounding the tonic and the dominant,
  and a pipe or ‘chanter’, which gives the incomplete scale
  characteristic of Celtic music.

Footnote 9:

  La vecchia aristocrazia e la Chiesa non hanno ancora rinunciato alla
  speranza di una restaurazione della monarchia in Francia, nella
  persona di Luigi Filippo, duca d’Orleans (n. 1869), figlio del fu
  conte di Parigi.

Footnote 10:

  The old aristocracy and the Church have not given up all hope of a
  restoration of the monarchy in France, in the person of
  Louis-Philippe, Duke of Orleans (b. 1869), son of the late Count of
  Paris.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 1. Table of Contents added by transcriber.
 2. The individual Italian and English pages were merged into one page
      with the Italian on the left and English on the right.
 3. P. 3, changed “scrupulosa” to “scrupolosa”.
 4. P. 7, changed “mesi a mesi” to “mesi e mesi”.
 5. P. 30, changed “trascicata” to “strascicata”.
 6. P. 37, changed “stupidita” to “stupidità”.
 7. P. 46, changed “colle le braccia” to “colle braccia”.
 8. P. 51, changed “pôrci” to “pórci”.
 9. P. 53, changed “comme” to “come”.
10. Spelling errors in Italian were left uncorrected except as noted.
11. Silently corrected English typographical errors and variations in
      spelling.
12. Archaic, non-standard, and uncertain spellings retained as printed.
13. Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE IDIOTS ***

***** This file should be named 63893-0.txt or 63893-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
    http://www.gutenberg.org/6/3/8/9/63893/

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org 

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary 
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Planet Named Joe, by S. A. Lombino

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: A Planet Named Joe

Author: S. A. Lombino

Release Date: November 27, 2020 [EBook #63890]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A PLANET NAMED JOE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                          A PLANET NAMED JOE

                           By S. A. LOMBINO

          _There were more Joes on Venus than you could shake
           a ray-gun at. Perhaps there was method in Colonel
        Walsh's madness--murder-madness--when he ordered Major
             Polk to scan the planet for a guy named Joe._

   [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from Planet Stories
November 1952. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the
           U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


Colonel Walsh had a great sense of humor. I hated his guts ever since
we went through the Academy together, but he had a great sense of humor.

For example, he could have chosen a Second Looie for the job on Venus.
He might even have picked a Captain. But he liked me about as much as
I liked him, and so he decided the job was just right for a Major. At
least, that's what he told me.

I stood at attention before his desk in the Patrol Station. We were
somewhere in Area Two on Earth, takeoff point for any operations in
Space II. The duty was fine, and I liked it a lot. Come to think of
it, the most I ever did was inspect a few defective tubes every now and
then. The rest was gravy, and Colonel Walsh wasn't going to let me get
by with gravy.

"It will be a simple assignment, Major," he said to me, peering over
his fingers. He held them up in front of him like a cathedral.

"Yes, sir," I said.

"It will involve finding one man, a Venusian native."

I wanted to say, "Then why the hell don't you send a green kid on
the job? Why me?" Instead, I nodded and watched him playing with his
fingers.

"The man is a trader of sorts. Rather intelligent." He paused, then
added, "For a native, that is."

I had never liked Walsh's attitude toward natives. I hadn't liked the
way he'd treated the natives on Mars ever since he'd taken over there.
Which brought to mind an important point.

"I always figured Venus was under the jurisdiction of Space III, sir. I
thought our activities were confined to Mars."

He folded his fingers like a deck of cards and dropped them on his desk
as if he were waiting for me to cut.

"Mmmm," he said, "yes, that's true. But this is a special job. It so
happens this Venusian is the one man who can help us understand just
what's happening on Mars."

I tried to picture a Venusian understanding Mars and I didn't get very
far.

"He's had many dealings with the natives there," Walsh explained. "If
anyone can tell us the reasons for the revolt, he can."

If Walsh really wanted to know the reasons for the revolt, I could give
them to him in one word: Walsh. I had to laugh at the way he called
it "revolt." It had been going on for six months now and we'd lost at
least a thousand men from Space II. Revolt.

"And this man is on Venus now?" I asked for confirmation. I'd never
been to Venus, being in Space II ever since I'd left the Moon run. It
was just like Walsh to ship me off to a strange place.

"Yes, Major," he said. "This man is on Venus."

At the Academy he had called me Fred. That was before I'd reported
him for sleeping on Boiler Watch. He'd goofed off on a pile of uranium
that could've, and almost did, blow the barracks sky-high that night.
He still thought it was my fault, as if I'd done the wrong thing by
reporting him. And now, through the fouled-up machinery that exists in
any military organization, he outranked me.

"And the man's name, sir?"

"Joe." A tight smile played on his face.

"Joe what?" I asked.

"Just Joe."

"Just Joe?"

"Yes," Walsh said. "A native, you know. They rarely go in for more than
first names. But then, it should be simple to find a man with a name
like Joe. Among the natives, I mean."

"I don't know, sir."

"A relatively simple assignment," Walsh said.

"Can you tell me anything else about this man? Physical appearance?
Personal habits? Anything?"

Walsh seemed to consider this for a moment. "Well, physically he's like
any of the other Venusians, so I can't give you much help there. He
does have a peculiar habit, though."

"What's that?"

"He has an affinity for Terran cigarettes."

I sighed. "Well, it's not very much to go on."

"You'll find him," Walsh said, grinning. "I'm sure of it."

       *       *       *       *       *

The trip to Venus came off without a hitch. I did a lot of thinking on
that trip. I thought about Mars and the revolt there. And I thought
about Colonel Leonard Walsh and how he was supposed to be quelling that
revolt. Ever since Walsh had taken command, ever since he'd started
pushing the natives around, there'd been trouble. It was almost as if
the whole damned planet had blown up in our faces the moment he took
over. Swell guy, Walsh.

Venus was hotter than I'd expected it to be. Much too hot for the tunic
I was wearing. It smelled, too. A funny smell I couldn't place. Like
a mixture of old shoe and after-shave. There were plants everywhere
I looked. Big plants and small ones, some blooming with flowers I'd
never seen before, and some as bare as cactus.

I recognized a blue figure as one of the natives the pilot had told me
about. He was tall, looking almost human except that everything about
him was elongated. His features, his muscles, everything seemed to have
been stretched like a rubber band. I kept expecting him to pop back to
normal. Instead, he flashed a double row of brilliant teeth at me.

I wondered if he spoke English. "Hey, boy," I called.

He ambled over with long-legged strides that closed the distance
between us in seconds.

"Call me Joe," he said.

I dropped my bags and stared at him. Maybe this _was_ going to be a
simple assignment after all. "I sure am glad to see you, Joe," I said.

"Same here, Toots," he answered.

"The guys back in Space II are searching high and low for you," I told
him.

"You've got the wrong number," he said, and I was a little surprised at
his use of Terran idiom.

"You are Joe, aren't you? Joe the trader?"

"I'm Joe, all right," he said. "Only thing I ever traded, though, was a
pocketknife. Got a set of keys for it."

"Oh," I said, my voice conveying my disappointment. I sighed and began
wondering just how I should go about contacting the Joe I was looking
for. My orders said I was to report to Captain Bransten immediately
upon arrival. I figured the hell with Captain Bransten. I outranked him
anyway, and there wasn't much he could do if I decided to stop for a
drink first.

"Where's the Officer's Club?" I asked the Venusian.

"Are you buying information or are you just curious?"

"Can you take me there?" I asked.

"Sure thing, Toots." He picked up my bags and started walking up a
heavily overgrown path. We'd probably walked for about ten minutes when
he dropped my bags and said, "There it is."

The Officer's Club was a plasteel hut with window shields that
protected it from the heat of the sun. It didn't look too comfortable
but I really wanted that drink. I reached into my tunic and slipped
the native thirty solars.

He stared at the credits curiously and then shrugged his shoulders. "Oh
well, you're new here. We'll let it go."

He took off then, while I stared after him, wondering just what he'd
meant. Had I tipped him too little?

I shrugged and looked over at the Officer's Club. From the outside it
looked as hot as hell.

On the inside it was about two degrees short of that mark. I began to
curse Walsh for taking me away from my nice soft job in Space II.

There wasn't much inside the club. A few tables and chairs, a dart game
and a bar. Behind the bar a tall Venusian lounged.

I walked over and asked, "What are you serving, pal?"

"Call me Joe," he answered.

He caught me off balance. "What?"

"Joe," he said again.

A faint glimmer of understanding began to penetrate my thick skull.
"You wouldn't happen to be Joe the trader? The guy who knows all about
Mars, would you?"

"I never left home," he said simply. "What are you drinking?"

That rat! That dirty, filthy, stinking, unprincipled....

_But then, it should be simple to find a man with a name like_ Joe.
_Among the natives, I mean._

Sure. Oh sure. Real simple. Walsh was about the lowest, most
contemptible....

"What are you drinking, pal?" the Venusian asked again.

"Skip it," I said. "How do I get to the captain's shack?"

"Follow your nose, pal. Can't miss it."

I started to pick up my bag as another Venusian entered. He waved at
the bartender.

"Hello, Joe," he said. "How's it going?"

"Not so hot, Joe," the bartender replied.

I listened in fascination. Joe, Joe, Joe. So this was Walsh's idea of a
great gag. Very funny. Very....

"You Major Polk, sweetheart?" the Venusian who'd just come in asked.

"Yes," I said, still thinking of Colonel Walsh.

"You better get your butt over to the captain's shack," he said. "He's
about ready to post you as overdue."

"Sure," I said wearily. "Will you take my bags, please?"

"Roger," he answered. He picked up the bags and nodded at the bar.

"So long, Joe," he said to the bartender.

"See you, Joe," the bartender called back.

       *       *       *       *       *

Captain Bransten was a mousey, unimpressive sort of man. He was wearing
a tropical tunic, but he still resembled a wilted lily more than he did
an officer.

"Have a seat, Major," he offered. He reached for a cigarette box on the
desk and extended it to me. He coughed in embarrassment when he saw it
was empty. Quickly, he pressed a button on his desk and the door popped
open. A tall, blue Venusian stepped lithely into the room.

"Sir?" the Venusian asked.

"We're out of cigarettes, Joe," the Captain said. "Will you get us
some, please?"

"Sure thing," the Venusian answered. He smiled broadly and closed the
door behind him.

_Another Joe_, I thought. _Another damned Joe._

"They steal them," Captain Bransten said abruptly.

"Steal what?" I asked.

"Cigarettes. I sometimes think the cigarette is one of the few things
they like about Terran culture."

So Walsh had taken care of that angle too. _He does have a peculiar
habit, though. He has an affinity for Terran cigarettes._ Cigarettes
was the tip I should have given; not solars.

"All right," I said, "suppose we start at the beginning."

Captain Bransten opened his eyes wide. "Sir?" he asked.

"What's with all this Joe business? It may be a very original name but
I think its popularity here is a little outstanding."

Captain Bransten began to chuckle softly. I personally didn't think it
was so funny. I tossed him my withering Superior Officer's gaze and
waited for his explanation.

"I hadn't realized this was your first time on Venus," he said.

"Is there a local hero named Joe?" I asked.

"No, no, nothing like that," he assured me. "It's a simple culture, you
know. Not nearly as developed as Mars."

"I can see that," I said bitingly.

"And the natives are only now becoming acquainted with Terran culture.
Lots of enlisted men, you know."

I began to get the idea. And I began to appreciate Walsh's doubtful
ancestry more keenly.

"It's impossible to tell exactly where it all started, of course,"
Bransten was saying.

I was beginning to get angry. Very angry. I was thinking of Walsh
sitting back in a nice cozy foam chair back on Earth.

"Get to the point, Captain!" I barked.

"Easy, sir," Bransten said, turning pale. I could see that the Captain
wasn't used to entertaining Majors. "The enlisted men. You know how
they are. They'll ask a native to do something and they'll call him
Joe. 'Hey, Joe, give me a hand with this.' Or 'Listen, Joe, how'd you
like to earn some cigarettes?' Do you follow?"

"I follow, all right," I said bitterly.

"Well," Bransten went on, "that sort of thing mushrooms. The natives
are a simple, almost childish people. It appealed to them--the Joe
business, I mean. Now they're all Joe. They like it. That and the
cigarettes."

He cleared his throat and looked at me apologetically as if he were
personally responsible for Venusian culture. In fact, he looked as if
he were responsible for having put Venus in the heavens in the first
place.

"Do you understand, Major? Just a case of extended idiom, that's all."

Just a case of extended _idiot_, I thought. An idiot on a wild goose
chase a hell of a long way from home.

"I understand perfectly," I snapped. "Where are my quarters?"

Bransten asked a Venusian named Joe to show me my quarters, reminding
me that chow was at thirteen hundred. As I was leaving, the first
Venusian came back with the cigarettes Bransten had ordered.

I could tell by the look on his face that he probably had half a carton
stuffed into his pockets. I shrugged and went to change into a tropical
tunic.

I called Earth right after chow. The Captain assured me that this sort
of thing was definitely against regulations, but he submitted when I
twinkled my little gold leaf under his nose.

Walsh's face appeared on the screen. He was smiling, looking like a fat
pussy cat.

"What is it, Major?" he asked.

"This man Joe," I said. "Can you give me any more on him?"

Walsh's grin grew wider. "Why, Major," he said, "you're not having any
difficulties, are you?"

"None at all," I snapped back. "I just thought I'd be able to find him
a lot sooner if...."

"Take your time, Major," Walsh beamed. "There's no rush at all."

"I thought...."

"I'm sure you can do the job," Walsh cut in. "I wouldn't have sent you
otherwise."

Hell, I was through kidding around. "Look...."

"He's somewhere in the jungle, you know," Walsh said.

I wanted to ram my fist into the screen, right smack up against those
big white teeth. Instead, I cut off the transmission and watched the
surprised look on his face as his screen went blank millions of miles
away.

He blinked at the screen, trying to realize I'd deliberately hung up on
him.

"Polk!" he shouted, "can you hear me?"

I smiled, saw the twisted hatred on his features, and then the screen
on my end went blank, too.

_He's somewhere in the jungle, you know._

I thanked Captain Bransten for his hospitality and went back to my
quarters.

As I saw it, there were two courses for me to follow.

One: I could say the hell with Walsh and Venus. That would mean hopping
the next ship back to Earth.

It would also mean disobeying the direct order of a superior officer.
It might mean demotion, and it might mean getting bounced out of the
Service altogether.

Two: I could assume there really was a guy name Joe somewhere in that
jungle, a Joe separate and apart from the other Joes on this planet, a
trader Joe who knew the Martians well. I could always admit failure, of
course, and return empty handed. Mission not accomplished. Or, I might
really find a guy who was trader Joe.

I made my decision quickly. I wanted to stay in the Service, and
besides Walsh may have been on the level for the first time in his
life. Maybe there was a Joe here who could help us on Mars. If there
was I'd try to find him. It was still a hell of a trick though.

I cursed Walsh again and pushed the buzzer near my bed.

A tall Venusian stepped into the room.

"Joe?" I asked, just to be sure.

"Who else, boss?" he answered.

"I'm trying to locate someone," I said. "I'll need a guide to take me
into the jungle. Can you get me one?"

"It'll cost you, boss," the Venusian said.

"How much?"

"Two cartons of cigarettes at least."

"Who's the guide?" I asked.

"How's the price sound?"

"Fine, fine," I said impatiently. And the Captain had said they were
almost a childish people!

"His name is Joe," the Venusian told me. "Best damn guide on the
planet. Take you anywhere you want to go, do anything you want to do.
Courageous. Doesn't know the meaning of fear. I've known him to...."

"Skip it," I said, cutting the promotion short. "Tell him to show up
around fifteen hundred with a complete list of what we'll need."

The Venusian started to leave.

"And Joe," I said, stopping him at the door, "I hope you're not
overlooking your commission on the deal."

His face broke into a wide grin. "No danger of that, boss," he said.

When he was gone I began figuring out a plan of action. Obviously, I'd
just have to traipse through the jungle looking for a guy named Joe on
a planet where everyone was named Joe. Everybody, at least, but the
Captain, the small garrison attached to the Station, and me.

       *       *       *       *       *

I began wondering why Walsh had gone to so much trouble to get rid of
me. The job, as I saw it, would take a hell of a long time. It seemed
like a silly thing to do, just to get even with a guy for something
that had happened years ago. He surely must have realized that I'd be
back again, sooner or later. Maybe he had another little junket all set
for me.

Or maybe he didn't expect me to come back.

The thought hadn't occurred to me before this, and I began to consider
it seriously. Walsh was no good, rotten clear through. He was failing
at the job of keeping Mars in hand, and he probably realized that a
few more mistakes on his part would mean the end of his career with
Space II. I chuckled as I thought of him isolated in some God-forsaken
place like Space V or Space VII. This probably bothered him a lot, too.
But what probably bothered him more was the fact that I was next in
command. If he were transferred, I'd be in charge of Space II, and I
could understand how much that would appeal to Walsh.

I tried to figure the thing out sensibly, tried to weigh his good
points against his bad. But it all came back to the same thing. A
guy who would deliberately go to sleep on Boiler Watch with a ton of
uranium ready to blast a barracks to smithereens if it wasn't watched,
would deliberately do just about anything.

Sending me off on a wild goose chase after a character named Joe may
have been a gag. But it may have been something a little grimmer than a
gag, and I made up my mind to be extremely careful from here on in.

The guide arrived at fifteen hundred on the dot. He was tall,
elongated, looked almost like all the other Venusians I'd seen so far.

"I understand you need a Grade A guide, sir," he said.

"Are you familiar with the jungle?" I asked him.

"Born and raised there, sir. Know it like the back of my hand."

"Has Joe told you what the payment will be?"

"Yes, sir. A carton and a half of cigarettes."

I thought about Joe deducting his commission and smiled.

"When can we leave?"

"Right away, sir. We won't need much really. I've made a list of
supplies and I can get them in less than an hour. I suggest you wear
light clothing, boots, and a hat."

"Will I need a weapon?"

He looked at me, his eyes faintly amused. "Why, what for, sir?"

"Never mind," I said. "What's your name, by the way?"

He lifted his eyebrows, and his eyes widened in his narrow face. He was
definitely surprised.

"Joe," he said. "Didn't you know?"

       *       *       *       *       *

When we'd been out for a while I discovered why Joe had suggested the
boots and the hat. The undergrowth was often sharp and jagged and it
would have sliced my legs to ribbons were they not protected by the
high boots. The hat kept the strong sun off my head.

Joe was an excellent guide and a pleasant companion. He seemed to be
enjoying a great romp, seemed to love the jungle and take a secret
pleasure in the work he was doing. There were times when I couldn't
see three feet ahead of me. He'd stand stock still for a few minutes,
his head barely moving, his eyes darting from one plant to another.
Then he'd say, "This way," and take off into what looked like more
impenetrable jungle invariably to find a little path leading directly
to another village.

Each village was the same. The natives would come running out of their
huts, tall and blue, shouting, "Cigarettes, Joe? Cigarettes?" It took
me a while to realize they were addressing me and not my guide.

Everybody was Joe. It was one beautiful, happy, joyous round of
stinking, hot jungle. And I wasn't getting any nearer my man. Nor had
I any idea how I was supposed to find him. I began to feel pretty low
about the whole affair.

Joe, on the other hand, enjoyed every moment of the trip. In each
village he greeted the natives cheerfully, told them stories, swapped
gossip and jokes. And when it was time to leave, he would say goodbye
to all his friends and we would plunge into the twisted foliage again.

His spirits were always high and he never failed to say the right thing
that would give a momentary lift to my own depressed state of mind. He
would talk for hours on end as we hacked our way through the jungle.

"I like Venus," he said once. "I would never leave it."

"Have you ever been to Earth?" I asked.

"No," Joe replied. "I like Terrans too, you understand. They are good
for Venus. And they are fun."

"Fun?" I asked, thinking of a particular species of Terran: species
Leonard Walsh.

"Yes, yes," he said wholeheartedly. "They joke and they laugh and ...
well, you know."

"I suppose so," I admitted.

Joe smiled secretly, and we pushed on. I began to find, more and more,
that I had started to talk freely to Joe. In the beginning he had been
just my guide. There had been the strained relationship of employer and
employee. But as the days lengthened into weeks, the formal atmosphere
began to crumble. I found myself telling him all about Earth, about
the people there, about my decision to attend the Academy, the rigid
tests, the grind, even the Moon run. Joe was a good listener, nodding
sympathetically, finding experiences in his own life to parallel my own.

And as our relationship progressed from a casual one to a definitely
friendly one, Joe seemed more enthusiastic than ever to keep up our
grinding pace to find what we were looking for.

Once we stopped in a clearing to rest. Joe lounged on the matted
greenery, his long body stretched out in front of him, the knife
gleaming in his belt. I'd seen him slash his way through thick, tangled
vines with that knife, his long, muscular arms powerfully slicing
through them like strips of silk.

"How far are we from the Station?" I asked.

"Three or four Earth weeks," he replied.

I sighed wearily. "Where do we go from here?"

"There are more villages," he said.

"We'll never find him."

"Possibly," Joe mused, the smile creeping over his face again.

"A wild goose chase. A fool's errand."

"We'd better get started," Joe said simply.

I got to my feet and we started the march again. Joe was still fresh, a
brilliant contrast to me, weary and dejected. Somehow, I had the same
feeling I'd had a long time ago on my sixteenth birthday. One of my
friends had taken me all over the city, finally dropping me off at my
own house where the whole gang was gathered for a surprise party. Joe
reminded me of that friend.

"There's a village ahead," he said, and the grin on his face was large
now, his eyes shining.

       *       *       *       *       *

Something was missing here. Natives. There were no natives rushing out
to greet us. No cries of "Cigarettes? Cigarettes?" I caught up with Joe.

"What's the story?" I whispered.

He shrugged knowingly and continued walking.

And then I saw the ship, nose pointing into space, catching the rays of
the sun like a great silver bullet.

"What...?" I started.

"It's all right," Joe said, smiling.

The ship looked vaguely familiar. I noticed the crest of Space II near
the nose, and a lot of things became clear then. I also saw Walsh
standing near one of the huts, a stun gun in his hand.

"Hello, Major," he called, almost cheerfully. The gun didn't look
cheerful, though. It was pointed at my head.

"Fancy meeting you here, Colonel," I said, trying to match his
joviality. Somehow it didn't quite come off.

Joe was walking beside me, waving at the colonel, beaming all over with
happiness.

"I see you found your man," Walsh said.

I turned rapidly. Joe nodded and kept grinning, a grin that told me he
was getting a big kick out of all this. Like a kid playing a game.

I faced Walsh again. "Okay, what's it all about, pal?"

"Colonel," Walsh corrected me. "You mustn't forget to say Colonel,
_Major_." He emphasized my rank, and he said it with a sort of ruthless
finality.

I waited. I could see he was just busting to tell me how clever he'd
been. Besides, there wasn't much I could do but wait. Not with Walsh
pointing the stun gun at my middle.

"We've come a long way since the Academy, haven't we, Major?"

"If you mean in miles," I said, looking around at the plants, "we sure
have."

Walsh grinned a little. "Always the wit," he said drily. And then the
smile faded from his lips and his eyes took on a hard lustre. "I'm
going to kill you, you know." He said it as if he were saying, "I think
it'll rain tomorrow."

Joe almost clapped his hands together with glee. He was really enjoying
this. Another of those funny Terran games.

"You gave me a powerful handicap to overcome," Walsh said. "I suppose I
should thank you, really."

"You're welcome," I said.

"It wasn't easy living down the disgrace you caused me."

"It was your own damn fault," I said. "You knew what you were doing
when you decided to cork off."

Beside me, Joe chuckled a little, enjoying the game immensely.

"You didn't have to report me," Walsh said.

"No? Maybe I should have forgotten all about it? Maybe I should have
nudged you and served you orange juice? So you could do it again
sometime and maybe blow up the whole damn Academy!"

Walsh was silent for a long time. When he spoke his voice was barely
audible. The heat was oppressive, as if it were concentrated on this
little spot in the jungle, focusing all its penetration on a small,
unimportant drama.

I could hear Joe breathing beside me.

"I'm on my way out," Walsh rasped. "Finished, do you understand?"

"Good," I said. And I meant it.

"This Mars thing. A terrible fix. Terrible."

Beside me, a slight frown crossed Joe's face. Apparently he couldn't
understand the seriousness of our voices. What had happened to the
game, the fun?

"You brought the Mars business on yourself," I told Walsh. "There was
never any trouble before you took command."

"The natives," he practically shouted. "They ... they...."

Joe caught his breath sharply, and I wondered what Walsh was going to
say about the natives. Apparently he'd realized that Joe was a native.
Or maybe Joe's knife had something to do with it.

"What about the natives?" I asked.

"Nothing," Walsh said. "Nothing." He was silent for a while.

"A man of my calibre," he said then, his face grim. "Dealing with
savages." He caught himself again and threw a hasty glance at Joe.
The perplexed frown had grown heavier on Joe's face. He looked at the
colonel in puzzlement.

       *       *       *       *       *

Walsh turned from Joe and raised the stun gun. I wondered if he had yet
realized that Joe was one of a million Joes scattered all over this
planet, that Joe was all the natives on Venus. That Joe was all the
natives everywhere throughout the galaxy. I looked at Walsh's eyes. He
was a sick man, alone with his thoughts in the middle of a stinking
jungle.

"I'm on my way out, Major," he said, "but you won't get a chance to
succeed where I've failed. No. Oh no. I'll see to that."

"And you had to come all the way to Venus to do it?"

"Don't joke," Walsh snapped. "Don't joke, Major. It's not funny. It's
not funny at all."

"It's pretty sad, I'd say."

"You can't afford to say anything," Walsh remarked drily. "You're going
to be dead in a very few minutes."

Joe's eyes widened, and I saw indecision cross his features as he tried
to understand what had happened to the game.

"What'll they say back on Earth when they hear about this?" I asked.

"When will they hear about it? Four, five months from now? By then, my
little trip will have been forgotten. Besides, I'm here on a routine
check. Everyone knows that."

"A routine check on Venus? Mars is your territory."

"One of my men is up here," Walsh said. "That gives me temporary
jurisdiction. At least enough to visit the planet and see how
conditions are. Anyway, I'll be home long before Joe here carries your
body in."

Joe shook his head imperceptibly but Walsh didn't catch it.

"A casualty in the jungle," Walsh continued. "The native will return
to the Station and explain the accident. I'll be back on Earth long
before he reaches there."

"Sure," I said, "nice and simple. You kill me and Joe delivers the news
and takes the rap. Good old sucker Joe."

"That's about enough out of you," Walsh said.

"Go ahead, Colonel," I shouted. "Pull the trigger. Then run off and
leave Joe to...."

"I said that's enough out of you!" Walsh shouted.

I turned to face Joe. His mouth was drawn across his face in a tight
emotionless line. He stepped in front of me and stared at Walsh.

"Get out of the way," Walsh commanded.

Joe shook his head slowly. "This is not what you told me. A friend, you
said. A surprise. You said you wanted to...."

"Get out of the way, you damned sav...."

With one swift movement Joe leaped forward. The knife gleamed in his
hand and there was momentary panic on Walsh's face.

The stun gun snapped up. It crackled once in the Venusian jungle, its
blast blinding me for a moment. It shuddered through Joe's left arm and
paralyzed it momentarily.

But the hand with the knife was hacking away at Walsh's throat, the
blood dripping down over the silver planet on the collar of his tunic.

I made my report to Bransten.

I told him the body of Colonel Leonard Walsh had been discovered in the
jungle. He was barely alive when he'd been found. I'd administered aid
but his knife wounds had proved to be fatal. He died shortly after I
found him.

"Awful," the captain said, "awful."

I nodded sympathetically.

"Did he say anything? Did he give you any idea? I mean, did he say who
did it?"

"Yes," I said. "He told me who murdered him."

We were standing near the platform of my ship, waiting for them to
prepare for blastoff.

"Well who, Major?" he asked. "Who did he say did it?"

"Joe," I explained. "A native named Joe."





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Planet Named Joe, by S. A. Lombino

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A PLANET NAMED JOE ***

***** This file should be named 63890.txt or 63890.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/3/8/9/63890/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Luminous Blonde, by Hayden Howard

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Luminous Blonde

Author: Hayden Howard

Release Date: November 27, 2020 [EBook #63889]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LUMINOUS BLONDE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                          THE LUMINOUS BLONDE

                           By HAYDEN HOWARD

            _Some dames are bright. Some brighter. Like the
           gorgeous wife of the playboy Commish who combined
           all the stellar attributes necessary to slice in
              two parts an ultra modern spaceship, and a
               marriage, with one swoop of a clockhand._

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                     Planet Stories November 1952.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


As the frilly-bloused rockette bent over him to unbuckle his
safticorsette, newly appointed Commissioner-For-Economics-For-Mars
J. Edwin Elbert peeked. But her fingernails tatted so hastily at the
buckle that he raised his surprisingly youthful blue eyes to her face.
She was blushing there too. A pretty little baby face.

Skillfully he swallowed a rising belch that was a natural consequence
of the cessation of gravity upon a paunch overbloated with farewell
champagne, Venus-dipped cold crab and too sweet apricot bread.

"Director Hugens is to be congratulated upon his choice of rockettes,"
he rumbled, sneaking his fat, glossily manicured fingers about her
wrist. The click of the powder-room door would warn him of his wife's
return. "Just the other day I was telling him that the new Bolo II
should have only the best. I see he has exceeded even my most hopeful
expectations."

She giggled nervously.

"Tell me my dear, when does the Bolo go into Hugens' celebrated
centrigrav? This weightlessness is rather unsettling to one's stomach."

"Can I get you a demamine pill, sir?"

"No, thank you. When does--"

"Oh! At 1900 hours," she gushed.

"The ship splits in half," she added helpfully, and dimpled in that
winning way of little girls who will never grow up.

"Remarkable. They tell me some sort of cable will tie us together."

"Yes sir, when we are far enough out in space so there isn't any air
friction, Mr. Webley, the pilot, pulls a little lever and the nose
flies off. He'll be all alone out there for forty-two days."

"And only a thin cable connects our passenger section to his control
section?" He was quite familiar with the details since he had lobbied
for the initial appropriation. Her forearm had a nice warm smooth
feeling.

"Oh, you understand it perfectly, sir. When we're a mile apart a little
rocket in the side makes us spin round and round. Then I can take off
these old iron shoes." She followed his gaze to her legs and tittered.

He speculated that similar magnets must be holding down the hem of her
nylon skirt.

"And does this spinning about a common axis continue until we near
Mars?"

"Yes sir, for forty-two days. Excuse me sir, I think null gravity is
making that lady ill."

After carefully wiping his palm on his coatsleeve he replaced his unlit
cigar in his broad, gleaming face. He was in the smiling sensuality of
a daydream when the powder-room door clicked.

His wife was beautiful.

Uptilting his cigar he watched her drift down the aisle. With one
scarlet-tipped finger she prevented her diaphanous skirt from floating
very high above her knees. A lovely lady. He champed on the cigar. It's
not every man whose wife is a natural blonde ex-starlet young enough to
be his daughter.

But a little discipline was in order.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Landa, I wish you had remembered to have Hykato pack my golf things."

"Edwin please, this null gravity is upsetting my tummy."

"Well, it's the least you could have done."

"And how would we have gotten it on the ship?" her voice shrilled
unexpectedly. "You embarrassed me enough as it was."

"Listen, I'm the Commissioner. No two-bit pilot is going to tell me
what I can't take. The luggage limit is ridiculous!"

"What are you complaining about? He let you take everything, didn't he?"

"After you smiled at him."

"I was only trying to be pleasant."

"Pleasant is it? Last time you said it was to influence him to take all
my luggage."

"Yeah and you got sore because you weren't a big enough shot to swing
the deal alone," her voice rasped through its lady-like veneer.

"That's a lie. Furthermore I don't want to catch you smiling at him
again."

"I give up," she exclaimed and reached for a telemag.

But he wouldn't drop it there. "I didn't like that fellow's looks.
Pads in his shoulders, little waxed mustache. Who does he think he is,
Captain Future?"

"Oh, don't be funny. Just think what he thinks of you after what you
said to him in front of all the other passengers and crew."

"Taking his side now?"

"I am not." She gave a little sniff and fumbled for her handkerchief.
"You're so mean and masterful I'm surprised you don't make me go up
front and tell him what a sap he is."

"He was a sap smiling at my wife all right." He uplifted his cigar with
a mollified grin. "He wasted a smile there. Two-bit pilot, who does he
think he is?"

"He did smile at me though," she appended in a small voice.

His voice snapped out again: "And you smiled back!" He ground his unlit
cigar into the ash tray. "I think you were just now trying to flatter
me; I think you were trying to turn me off the track when you said
you'd go up and tell him what a sap he is."

"I was not."

"Don't try to wiggle out of it. That's what you said."

"All right, if you think I should, I will."

"Well now--" He paused smiling and carefully trimmed the crushed end of
his cigar with a gold plated cigar cutter before he continued: "If you
insist, go ahead."

"There's not much time left," she said, pointing at the neon-dialed
clock above the powder-room door. Beneath it hung an orange luminescent
sign: U. S. Eastern Standard Earth Time Equivalent.

"1850 hours," he snorted. "Don't try to wiggle out on that account. You
have a half hour."

"O.K., if you say so," she shrugged and chewed the inside of her
cheek. "This isn't very nice."

"Let's not get that way. You coolly slip the shaft in me enough. And
stop powdering your nose."

Without another word she rose and floated down the aisle, taking little
care to suppress her skirt. Somebody whistled and the Commissioner
angrily craned his thick neck around. He couldn't see who had done it.
But he suspected the three grinning Cadet Astronauts in the last row of
seats.

[Illustration: _She rose and floated down the aisle, taking little care
to suppress her rising, diaphanous skirt._]

As the door to the control room clanged shut, the powder-room door
clicked open and the rockette tapped out on her iron shoe-soles.
Commissioner Elbert rolled his eyes and smiled, but she seemed
preoccupied with a smaller female with pigtails and the hiccups.

Guess I'll have a look forward myself, he thought. Just like a woman to
go up there, wait in the hall a minute and come back.

Rising, he floated past the rockette toward the control room door.

"Don't open that, sir. The ship's about to separate."

"What? It's only 1855 hours."

"That is Eastern Standard Time, sir. The clock at the other end of
the aisle, over the men's room, gives the Standard Star Time our ship
schedule operates on."

Those neon hands pointed at 1900.

With a strangled yell he lunged for the door, but as his hand closed
about the handle something clicked and it resisted his straining and
then his pounding fists.

A buzzer sounded and a cheery masculine voice spoke over the intercom.
"Hello again passengers, this is your pilot Hugh Webley wishing you a
pleasant crossing. Please re-enter your safticorsettes. The Bolo II
will now separate."

"Intercom," the Commissioner shouted. Shoving past the slack-jawed
rockette, he literally swam down the gravityless aisle to the
engineering hatchway. It opened to his shouts.

"Yeah?" A giant with a handlebar mustache peered up at him.

"I'm Commissioner Elbert. Call your pilot at once. I order the ship not
to separate."

       *       *       *       *       *

Hastily the giant lifted the phone. Commissioner Elbert could hear the
steady buzz.

"Sorry sir, Webley's cut us off. He does that so no one will interrupt
him while he's setting the auto controls."

"Get him somehow. My wife's up there."

The giant coughed and strangled and turned his face away. "I'll keep
trying sir," he gasped. "But sometimes he cuts us off for days. He
sleeps a lot."

"Forehatch," the Commissioner shouted suddenly. "Unlock the forehatch."

Wearily the giant clambered up. He towered above Elbert.

"Didn't you hear what I said," the Commissioner yelled. "Unlock the
door to the control room."

"Sorry sir, the lock's automatic."

"Well dammit, blast it down."

Noisily the giant scratched his crewcut. "Maybe I could crowbar it."

"Quick, you fool."

"No, I can't. I can't sir. The ship might separate while the hatch was
open and our own air pressure would blow us all into the vacuum. I
can't risk the lives of our passengers, sir."

"I'm Commissioner Elbert. Give me that crowbar."

The giant held it behind him.

"That's an order."

"Sorry sir, better reclaim your seat before the jolt." The giant
signalled with his fingers at the rockette.

Elbert snatched at the crowbar. As the two men grappled for it,
whirling like fighting cocks in the air, a tremendous surge hurled them
the length of the aisle. Another slammed them against the powder-room
door. When the giant helped the bleeding Commissioner to his feet,
artificial gravity held them down.

Emitting motherly sounds, the rockette tried to wipe the blood from his
forehead. But he shoved her aside.

"I'll sue. I'll have your transport license revoked."

"Please sir," the rockette squeaked, "I'll bring you a sedative."

"Hugens will hear about this," he shouted, writhing in the engineer's
brawny arms. But then he sobbed: "I sent her up there. My fault, my
idea, she didn't want to go. She was worried about the time and I told
her there was plenty of time."

As he gulped the sedative he looked like a punctured balloon.

"I don't want a sedative," he shouted. But he had just swallowed it.
He sagged again. "My fault. I told her there was plenty of time." He
rubbed his sleeve across his nose.

After they had settled him groggily in his seat, the rockette drew the
engineer aside. Her pretty little brow wrinkled.

"Dan, I can't figure it. Why does he think it's his fault? Gee, when
we were in the powder-room together she asked me about why the clocks
told different times, and I explained how we figure time by positions
of stars instead of the earth and sun and all that stuff. You'd think
she'd understood. She talked bright enough."

The giant squeezed her arm affectionately. Lucky Webley, sap Commish,
bright dame. Forty-two days and an alibi.

He chuckled and walked his fingers up her arm.

"Carol, you can't ever tell. All dames don't have the same amount of
brightness you do."

She giggled and shivered a little at his hand. "We learned all about
time in rockette school."





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Luminous Blonde, by Hayden Howard

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LUMINOUS BLONDE ***

***** This file should be named 63889.txt or 63889.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/3/8/8/63889/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg EBook of Fourth Down!, by Ralph Henry Barbour

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this ebook.

Title: Fourth Down!

Author: Ralph Henry Barbour

Release Date: November 27, 2020 [EBook #63892]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Donald Cummings and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team
             at https://www.pgdp.net

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FOURTH DOWN! ***




                              FOURTH DOWN




[Illustration: IN THE VERY CENTER OF IT, PLUNGING, FIGHTING, WAS HEMING]




                             FOURTH DOWN!


                                  BY
                          RALPH HENRY BARBOUR

                    AUTHOR OF “THE PLAY THAT WON,”
                      “THE LOST DIRIGIBLE,” ETC.


                            [Illustration]


                        D. APPLETON AND COMPANY
                         NEW YORK      LONDON
                                 1920




                          COPYRIGHT, 1920, BY
                        D. APPLETON AND COMPANY


                PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA




CONTENTS


 CHAPTER                               PAGE
      I. BACK TO SCHOOL                   1
     II. NEW QUARTERS                    15
    III. SID OFFERS ADVICE               25
     IV. G. W. TUBB                      37
      V. WITH THE SECOND                 46
     VI. SIGNALS                         57
    VII. TOBY MAKES A CALL               67
   VIII. TUBB TRIES FOOTBALL             79
     IX. YARDLEY PLAYS GREENBURG         94
      X. TOBY EMPTIES HIS LOCKER        105
     XI. TOM FANNING, OPTIMIST          117
    XII. FIRST TEAM VS. SECOND          136
   XIII. TEAM-MATES FALL OUT            146
    XIV. TOBY AT QUARTER                156
     XV. THE “TOUGH BUNCH”              169
    XVI. TUBB WINS PROMOTION            189
   XVII. AN “ACCIDENT”                  201
  XVIII. A QUARTER-BACK RUN             218
    XIX. ARNOLD HAS A THOUGHT           231
     XX. AN ENCOUNTER ON THE BEACH      241
    XXI. TUBB BARKS A KNUCKLE           255
   XXII. A VISIT TO THE OFFICE          269
  XXIII. TUBB ON THE TRAIL              283
   XXIV. FRICK IS CALLED AWAY           294
    XXV. FOURTH DOWN                    305




FOURTH DOWN




CHAPTER I

BACK TO SCHOOL


“We ought to be there in about twenty minutes,” observed Arnold
Deering, glancing at his watch.

One of his companions in the day-coach tossed the magazine he had been
idly glancing through, to the top of the pile of suitcases beside him,
yawned widely, and nodded without enthusiasm.

“If nothing happens,” he agreed.

“What’s going to happen, you chump?”

“Nothing, I suppose. Only, something might. There might be an
earthquake, or the train might jump the track, or――――”

“Or you might talk sense, Frank! As for jumping the track, this old
train couldn’t jump a crack in the floor! I guess you’re wishing
something would happen so you wouldn’t have to go back.”

“Oh, I don’t know,” Frank Lamson answered doubtfully. “I guess I don’t
mind――much. School’s all right after a day or two. It’s getting into
the swing, just at first, that’s hard.”

“In the interest of education,” proclaimed Arnold pompously, “I move
that summer vacations be abolished.”

“Put it the other way around,” said Frank, “and I’ll second the motion.
Joking aside, though, summer vacations are fine, but they certainly
spoil a chap for hard work.” He shook his head dolefully. He was a
heavily-built youth of seventeen, but the heaviness was that of bone
and sinew rather than of fat. With regular features, dark hair and eyes
and a healthy skin, he was undeniably good-looking, although the mouth
somehow suggested a sort of lazy arrogance and led an observer to the
conclusion that he was not invariably as amiable as at present. He was
almost painfully correct as to attire.

“Work!” sighed Arnold. “Why introduce unpleasant subjects? Ever since
I struck Yardley fellows have dinned it into me that this year is the
toughest of all. ‘If you think Third Class is hard,’ they said, ‘just
wait till you’re in Second!’ It doesn’t sound good to me, Frank!”

“Piffle! Fellows always talk that way. Even First Class fellows shake
their heads and tell you they’re the hardest worked bunch in school,
and any one with a grain of sense knows that the last year’s a perfect
cinch. Anyway, you don’t need to worry. You’re starting clean. I’ve got
a condition to work off, worse luck. I’m the one who ought to be sore.”

“Too bad,” said Arnold sympathetically. “Still, ‘Old Tige’s’ bark is
worse than his bite, Frank. You’ll get clear all right.”

“Hope so.” Frank leaned across the piled-up luggage to look through the
window. A fleeting glimpse of the sun-flecked surface of Long Island
Sound met his vision, and he frowned, mentally contrasting the lazy,
frolic-filled days of the passing summer with the duties drawing nearer
every minute. “Light House Point,” he said, nodding. “Greenburg in ten
minutes.”

“If nothing happens,” quoted Arnold, with a smile. Like the boy
opposite him, he was seventeen years of age, and, like him, too, he
was extremely well-dressed. But in Arnold Deering’s case the attire
appeared to stop short of effort, or it may have been that he was less
conscious of it. While it is fair to call Frank good-looking it is no
exaggeration to say that Arnold was handsome. A straight nose under
a broad forehead, deep brown eyes, a mouth showing good-temper, and a
round chin, all went to make up a countenance extremely attractive.
He wore his dark brown hair brushed straight back, a style that went
well both with his face and with his height and slenderness. There
was nothing effeminate about him, though. He was not what fellows
contemptuously call a “pretty boy” and his slim frame was well-muscled
and suggested the best of physical condition.

“Don’t think I’d mind if something did happen,” answered Frank, rather
disconsolately, “so long as it put off the evil day.”

“Cheer up, old thing!” laughed Arnold. “To-morrow you’ll be as gay as a
lark, won’t he, Toby?”

The third member of the party, who, next the window, had been occupied
with a magazine for the last half-hour, turned a pair of very blue eyes
toward the speaker and smiled. Although he had been following the story
closely, the conversation of his companions had not been entirely lost
to him, and Arnold’s question had reached him between the last word on
page 19 and the continuation on an elusive page 134. “I’d never expect
to see Frank as gay as a lark,” he replied readily. “If you had said
as happy as a seagull, though――――” He returned to the search for page
134.

“Seagull?” protested Arnold. “The silly things never _are_ happy!
They’re always crying and making a fuss.”

“Oh, they’re happy enough,” said the other, with a twinkle in his eyes,
“but they don’t want to think so!”

Arnold laughed and Frank said, “You go to the dickens, Toby,” but
grinned a little as he said it. There had been a time when he would
have taken Toby Tucker’s jest not so amiably, but closer intimacy with
that youth had rendered his dignity less tender.

“Toby’s got you sized up, Frank,” laughed Arnold. “You do like to
grouch a bit, you know.”

“We all do, at times,” said Toby, comfortingly. He found the page he
was seeking and settled back again. But Arnold plucked the magazine
from his hands and tossed it to the opposite seat.

“We’re nearly in Greenburg, T. Tucker,” he said. “Sit up like a
gentleman and talk to us.”

Toby looked reproachfully at his friend and regretfully at the
magazine. Then he smiled. He had rather a remarkable smile, had Toby.
It made you forget that his nose was too short, his chin almost
aggressively square, his tanned face too liberally freckled, his hair
undeniably red. It made him almost good-looking and eminently likable.
Tobias Tucker’s smile was a valuable asset to him, although he didn’t
know it.

“What shall I talk about?” he asked. “Want me to tell you a dreadfully
funny story?”

“What’s it about?” demanded Arnold, suspiciously.

“About old Cap’n Gaines,” replied Toby, innocently. “He――――”

“_Help!_” cried the others with unflattering unanimity.

“If you ever try to tell that again, Toby,” added Arnold, very stern
and very solemn, “we’ll――――”

But what was to happen in such an event was never told, for what
happened at that moment very effectually ended Arnold’s discourse.
There was a terrific grinding of brakes, a loud hissing sound, and an
irresistible tendency on the part of every one and everything in the
day-coach to proceed hurriedly to the front door. Because of various
obstructions none succeeded, but all did their best. Arnold landed in
Frank’s lap and Toby draped himself over the piled-up luggage, his
head hanging over the back of the seat ahead. A cloud of unsuspected
dust filled the car as, with a series of emphatic and uncomfortable
jerks, the train came to a standstill. To the accompaniment of a vocal
confusion of cries, exclamations, and grunts, the occupants of the car
disentangled themselves from each other or picked themselves from the
floor.

“Get――off――me!” groaned Frank. “You’ve――broken――my neck!”

“What was it?” gasped Arnold, relieving the other of his unwelcome
embrace. “Are we wrecked?”

“I am, anyway!” growled Frank. “Where’s my hat? Oh, thanks!” He
accepted it from a dazed occupant of the seat ahead. Toby Tucker
retired from his graceful position atop the suitcases and observed
Arnold questioningly, his straw hat tilted down to the bridge of his
nose. Arnold chuckled. “Guess it was Frank’s earthquake,” he said.

“Keep your places!” admonished a trainman, putting his head in the
forward door. “Obstruction on the track! No danger!”

“Gee!” muttered Toby. “That was some stop, fellows!”

“It sure was!” agreed Frank emphatically, feeling doubtfully of his
neck. “It nearly snapped my head off! And then Arn landed on me like a
ton of bricks.”

“Let’s go see,” said Toby. “What’s this?” He raised a foot from which
dangled Arnold’s hat. “I’m sorry. Sort of mussed, I’m afraid.”

Arnold took it, viewed it ruefully and put it on. “It’s all Frank’s
fault,” he grumbled as he joined the exodus through the nearer door.
“He insisted that something was going to happen, and it did!”

How near that something had come to being a catastrophe was revealed
to them when they pushed their way through the throng at the head of
the train. Not eighty feet distant from the pilot of the throbbing
locomotive stood a lone box-car, its forward truck lodged against its
rear. It was loaded and sealed and marked “Greenburg.” A curve in the
track behind had hidden it from the fireman’s sight until there had
remained just space in which to avert a collision.

“How do you suppose it got here?” asked Frank.

“Front truck got loose and the car broke its coupling, so they say,”
volunteered a boy beside him.

“Hello, Billy,” greeted Frank. “You on the train? I didn’t see you. I
suppose this will hold us up awhile, eh?”

“I thought they always had a caboose on the tail-end of a freight,”
objected Arnold.

“I believe they do,” agreed Billy Temple, “but this car and some more
were on a siding about a mile back and they were sort of switching ’em
into the Greenburg yard. Hello, Tucker. What car were you fellows in?”

“Fourth, I guess,” answered Arnold. “If it hadn’t been for Frank,
though, I’d have landed in the first when we stopped! Felt as if my
spine was being pushed right through to the front of me!”

“Me too,” chuckled Temple. “There was an old codger in my car with
a basket of eggs. He got on at that last stop we made. There wasn’t
much room, so he kept the eggs in his lap. Then Mr. Engineer put the
airbrakes on and――Bingo!”

“What happened?” demanded Arnold delightedly.

“Why, the old gentleman and the eggs went on top of a fat man in front.
Talk about your omelets! Oh, boy!”

“Let’s go back and sit down,” suggested Toby when Temple’s narrative
had been properly appreciated. “It’s too hot out here. And I suppose we
won’t get started again for an hour.”

“More like two,” grumbled Frank. “They’ll have to send a wrecking
train and lift that car out of the way. Rotten luck!”

“Hark to the plaintive wail of the seagull,” murmured Toby.

“That’s right, Frank,” Arnold chuckled. “Ten minutes ago you wanted
something to happen to keep you from getting to Yardley, and now――――”

“That’s all right,” answered Frank haughtily, “but it’s nearly four,
and supper’s at six.”

“True, O Solomon! I get your viewpoint. There is much in what you say.
Still, if we get moving again in an hour or so――――”

“We might walk, if it wasn’t for the bags,” mused Toby. “It can’t be
more than eight or nine miles.”

“Eight or nine miles!” moaned Arnold. “And on an empty stomach!”

“We-ell, I meant on the railroad,” said Toby demurely, “but if you
prefer――――”

“Wish we had a pack of cards,” said Frank gloomily as they returned
to their car. “We might have a three-handed game of something. Or get
Billy Temple in here.”

“I’m going to finish that story I was reading,” said Toby. “You two
play.”

“Well, if we can find some cards,” began Arnold, leading the way to
their seats. Then: “What’s the matter with the chap over there, Toby?
Nose-bleed?” he asked.

Toby, following his friend’s gaze, saw a pale-faced, large-eyed boy of
perhaps fifteen holding a crimson-stained handkerchief to his face.
“Guess so,” said Toby. “Maybe he got bumped. Wonder if he knows how to
stop it?”

“Do you?” Arnold asked, pushing by to his seat.

“Yes, I know four or five ways. Guess I’ll ask him.”

He left the others and walked back three seats to where the boy was
hunched somewhat disconsolately beside an open window. He was a
surprisingly unattractive chap, Toby thought, but maybe he couldn’t
help that unwholesome white complexion. But he could help, Toby told
himself a moment later, that very soiled collar he was wearing!

“Nose-bleed?” asked Toby smilingly.

The boy shook his head, looking up over the stained handkerchief with
an expression of sullen suspicion in his staring brown eyes.

“What’s the trouble then?” Toby took the vacant seat. “Let me have a
look, won’t you?”

After a second of hesitation the boy removed the handkerchief,
revealing a short but deep cut on his upper lip. It was bleeding
profusely. Toby clucked sympathetically. “How’d you get it?” he asked.

“I was getting a drink back there,” muttered the boy, “when the train
stopped. It threw me against the arm of a seat, I guess. Anyway, first
thing I knew I was on the floor.” His tone was resentful and his look
seemed to hold Toby to blame for the accident.

“Too bad,” said the latter kindly. “Got another handkerchief with you?”
The boy shook his head. “I’ll lend you one, then. I’ll get it and wash
the cut well. You step back to the water tank.”

Toby returned to his seat and dragged his suitcase from the pile.
“Fellow’s got a nasty cut on his lip,” he explained. “Fell down when
the train slowed up and hit on something.”

“What are you going to do?” inquired Frank. “Operate on him?”

“Find a handkerchief for him.”

“Who is he? One of our chaps?” asked Arnold.

“I don’t know. He may be. Doesn’t look it. Get your enormous feet out
of the way. I’ll be back in a sec.”

“If you want any one to administer the ether――――” suggested Frank.

Toby laughed and joined his patient by the rear door. There he gave
the wound a thorough washing, while the boy scowled and grunted. Then,
seeing that the sides of the cut ought to be brought together, he left
the other with a folded handkerchief pressed to the wound and made
his way forward to the baggage car. When he returned he had a roll of
surgeon’s tape and a wad of absorbent cotton. The boy protested in
his sullen way against further repairs, but Toby overruled him. “You
don’t want a nasty scar there,” he said cheerfully. “You hold this
cotton there until I get the tape ready. That’s it. All right now. Hold
steady, now. I’m not hurting you. There! Now we’ll roll this cotton in
the handkerchief and you can stop the blood with it. I don’t think it
will bleed much longer. Have you got far to go?”

“Wissining,” muttered the boy.

“Oh, do you live in Wissining?”

“No, I’m going to school there,” answered the other resentfully. “I
thought maybe you were, too.”

“Why, yes, I am. You must be a new boy then.”

The other nodded. “I’ve never seen the rotten place,” he said.

“Really?” asked Toby rather coldly. “Well, I hope you’ll like it better
than you think.”

The boy stared back in his sullen fashion. “Shan’t,” he muttered. Toby
shrugged.

“That’s up to you, I guess.” He nodded curtly and moved away, feeling
relieved at the parting. But the boy stopped his steps.

“Say, what’ll I do with this handkerchief?” he asked.

“Oh, throw it away, please,” said Toby.

If he had done so this story might have been different.




CHAPTER II

NEW QUARTERS


At eight o’clock that evening, having reached Wissining only a little
more than an hour late and done full justice to supper, Toby and
Arnold were busily unpacking and setting things to rights in Number 12
Whitson, which, as those who know Yardley Hall School will remember, is
the granite dormitory building facing southward, flanked on the west by
the equally venerable Oxford Hall and on the east by the more modern
Clarke. There were those who liked the old-time atmosphere of Whitson;
its wooden stairways, its low ceilings, its deep window embrasures and
wide seats; who even forgave many a lack of convenience for the sake
of the somewhat dingy home-likeness. Perhaps, too, they liked to feel
themselves heirs to the legends and associations that clustered about
the building. On the other hand, there were scoffers dwelling more
luxuriously in Clarke or Dudley or Merle who declared that the true
reason for Whitson’s popularity was that the dining hall, known at
Yardley as Commons, occupied the lower floor and that fellows living in
the building consequently enjoyed an advantage over those dwelling in
the other dormitories.

Not all the Whitson rooms were desirable, however. On the third floor,
for instance, was one that Toby, when he looked about the comparative
grandeur of Number 12, remembered without regrets. He had passed last
year under its sloping roof in an atmosphere of benzine and cooking.
The benzine odor was due to the fact that he had conducted a fairly
remunerative business in cleaning and pressing clothes, the smell of
cooking to the fact that the room’s one window was directly above the
basement kitchen. This year the atmosphere promised to be sweeter, for
Number 12 was on the front of the building, away from the kitchen, and
Toby had retired from business.

There were moments when he viewed his retirement with alarm, for,
although his father had assured him that sufficient money would be
forthcoming to meet expenses if Toby managed carefully, he couldn’t
quite forget that, should anything interrupt the prosperity of the
boat-building business at home, there would be nothing to fall back
on. But Arnold had made the abandoning of the cleaning and pressing
industry a condition of his invitation to a share of Number 12.
“Homer’s not coming back, Toby,” he had announced in August. (Homer
Wilkins had been Arnold’s roommate the preceding year.) “I wish you’d
come down to Number 12 with me. It won’t cost you much more than that
cell up in Poverty Row; and that’s an awful dive, anyway. Of course,
you can’t go on with that beastly, smelly clothes-cleaning stunt, but
you weren’t going to anyway, were you? I mean, since your father’s
business has picked up so this spring and summer you won’t have to, eh?”

Frankly, Toby had fully intended to. Being even partly self-supporting
gives one a feeling of independence that one hates to lose. But Toby
said nothing of that. He thought it over and, because he was very fond
of Arnold, as Arnold was of him, and because Number 22 had been pretty
bad at times, he yielded. This evening he was very glad that he had,
as, pausing with a crumpled pair of trousers in his hand midway between
his battered trunk and his closet, he viewed again the quiet comfort
of the big square room. Wilkins had removed a few things, but they
were not missed, and Arnold’s folks were sending down another chair
and a small bookcase from New York for Toby’s use. A fellow ought,
he reflected, to be very happy in such a place; and he felt renewed
gratitude to Arnold for choosing him to share its comforts. Arnold
might easily have picked one of several fellows as a roommate without
surprising Toby: Frank, for instance. Arnold had known Frank longer
than he had known Toby. Reflecting in such fashion, Toby remained
immovable so long that Arnold, who had for the moment abandoned more
important business to put together a new loose-leaf notebook under the
mellow glow of the droplight on the big table, looked across curiously.

“What’s your difficulty, T. Tucker?” he asked. “Gone to sleep on your
feet? Reaction, I suppose, after the near-trainwreck!”

“I was just thinking,” answered Toby slowly, “that this is an awfully
jolly room and that it was mighty good of you to let me come in with
you.”

“Well, the room’s all right. (How in the dickens does this thing
catch?) I like it a heap better than those mission-furnished rooms
in Clarke. Of course, next year I suppose I’ll try for Dudley, with
the rest of the First Class fellows, although I don’t know about
that, either. Maybe I won’t. Maybe I’ll stick here. It’s getting a
whole lot like home, Toby. But as for its being good for me to have
you with me here, why, that’s sort of funny, T. Tucker. Guess you’re
not the only one that’s――er――that’s benefited, what? Rather like it
myself, if you must know. Homer and I got on pretty well, all things
considered, but that was mainly because he’s too lazy to quarrel with
you about anything. Personally, Toby, I like a row now and then. It
sort of――clears the atmosphere, so to speak. That’s why I thought of
you. You’ve got such a perfectly beastly disposition and such a rotten
temper that I can have a scrap whenever I feel the need of it. So, you
see, it was pure selfishness, after all, old thing.”

Toby smiled and went over to the closet with his burden. “We started
with a scrap, anyway,” he said. “Remember it, Arn?”

“Perfectly. I intimated that your hair was sort of reddish and you
didn’t like it. So you came at me like a cyclone and we both went into
the harbor. I remember it perfectly. It started because you wanted
twenty-four cents a gallon for some gasoline.”

“Twenty-two. You said you paid only twenty in New York.”

“Anyway, I offered you less than you asked, and you said you’d pump it
out of the tank again, and――――”

“Good thing I didn’t have to try it,” laughed Toby. “That was only a
little over a year ago, Arn! Why, it seems years!”

“Much has happened since then, T. Tucker,” replied Arnold, tossing the
notebook on the table. “Events have transpired. In the short space
of――let me see; this is September――in the short space of fifteen months
you were rescued from a living-death in the Johnstown High School and
became a person of prominence at Yardley Hall!”

“Prominent as a cleaner and presser of clothes,” laughed Toby.

“Nay, nay, prominent as one swell hockey player, Toby, and also, if
I mistake not, as a rescuer of drowning youths. Don’t forget you’re
a hero, old thing. By the way, I wonder if young Lingard’s back. For
your sake, I hope he isn’t. His gratitude to you for saving him from a
watery death was a bit embarrassing to you, I thought!”

Toby smiled ruefully. “You didn’t _think_, you _knew_,” he said grimly.
Arnold laughed.

“To see you slinking around a corner to evade the kid was killing,
Toby! And he is such a little rotter, too! While you were rescuing,
why didn’t you pull out something a little more select?”

“Oh, Tommy isn’t a bad sort really,” responded Toby earnestly. “He――he
just didn’t get the right sort of bringing-up, I suppose.”

“Maybe. Personally, I always feel like taking him over my knee and
wearing out a shingle on him! Well, this won’t get our things unpacked.
Let’s knock off after a bit and see who’s back. Funny none of the gang
has been in. Wonder if Fan’s back. And Ted Halliday.”

“I saw Fanning at supper,” said Toby.

“We’ll run over to Dudley after awhile and look him up. You like him,
don’t you, Toby?”

“Fanning? Yes, but I don’t really know him as well as some of the other
fellows. He’s football captain this year, isn’t he?”

“Yes.” Arnold nodded and then frowned. “Sometimes I wish we’d elected
some one else: Ted, maybe, or Jim Rose.”

“Why? I thought you liked Fanning a lot. And he was the whole thing
last year in the Broadwood game, wasn’t he?”

“I do like him. He’s a mighty fine chap. And he’s a whale of a player.
Only, what sort of a captain will he make? He’s too easy, to my way
of thinking. He’s likely to fall for a lot of fellows who can’t
play much just because they’re friends of his. I don’t mean that he
will intentionally show favoritism, but he’s too plaguy loyal to his
friends, Toby. To tell the truth, I’m half inclined to stay out of
it this fall――No, that isn’t so, either. What I do mean is that I’m
scared that Fan may keep me on even if I don’t really make good. And
I’d hate that worse than poison. I want to make the team, but I don’t
want fellows to wink and laugh and look wise about me. You know the
sort of stuff: ‘Oh, Deering, ye-es, he’s all right. But it’s lucky for
him Fanning’s a friend of his!’ That sort of guff. Of course, this new
coach, Lyle, may be a chap with a mind of his own and not stand for any
of the friend-of-my-youth stuff. I hope so. I’d feel better anyway. By
the way, you haven’t changed your mind, Toby?”

“About football? No.”

“I wish you would. Why don’t you?”

“Lots of reasons,” answered Toby smilingly. “In the first place, I
tried it last fall. In the sec――――”

“You call that trying? You just went out with a whole mob of fellows
and loafed around until they got tired of walking on you. Besides, you
were out for the Second. The First’s a different proposition, son,
especially now that you’ve made good in hockey. Every one knows that
you’ll be hockey captain next year.”

“It’s more than I know,” said Toby good-naturedly. “Anyhow――――”

“And you’re at least fifteen pounds heavier than a year ago. They said
you were too light, didn’t they?”

“They meant in the head,” replied the other gravely.

“They were dead right, too! But, honest, old thing, joking aside――――”

“Arn, I haven’t got time for football and I can’t afford it.”

“That’s what you said about hockey last winter. And you were so pressed
for time that you copped a Ripley Scholarship! As for ‘affording’ it,
where’s the expense come in?”

“Togs and things,” answered Toby. “And traveling expenses. Arn, if
I went in for football and made the team――which I couldn’t do in a
million years――I’d have to go back to sponging coats and pressing
trousers, and that would make the room awfully smelly, and you wouldn’t
like it a bit.” And Toby ended with a laugh.

“Piffle! All right, have your own stubborn way. You’ll miss a whole lot
of fun, though.”

“And a whole lot of bruises! Anyway, Arn, one football hero is enough
in a family. I’ll stay at home and cut surgeon’s plaster for you and
keep your crutches handy and hear your alibis.”

“Idiot,” said Arnold. “Come on, dump that truck on the chair and let’s
go over to Dudley. I want to hear some sensible conversation for a
change.”

“You don’t mean you’re going to keep quiet all evening, do you?” asked
Toby with concern.




CHAPTER III

SID OFFERS ADVICE


The school year began the next morning. Many new faces confronted
Toby in the recitation rooms and some familiar ones were missing.
Toby’s list of friends had not been a long one last year, although
acquaintances had been many. It had been his first year at Yardley
Hall, which fact, coupled with a fairly retiring disposition, had left
him rather on the outside. It is always a handicap to enter school
in a class below your friends, which is what Toby had done. Arnold
and Frank, both a year older, had been in the Third, while Toby had
gone into the Fourth. Consequently the fellows he had met through
Arnold――Frank had not counted greatly as a friend last year――had few
interests that were Toby’s. To be sure, in early spring, after he had
made a success of hockey, things had been somewhat different. But even
then he had remained a pretty insignificant person among the three
hundred and odd that made up the student body of Yardley Hall School.
Not that Toby cared or thought much about it. He was too busy getting
through the year without calling on his father for further financial
assistance to pay much attention to the gentle art of acquiring friends.

One friend, however, Toby had had, whether or no. That was Tommy
Lingard, a Preparatory Class youngster, pink-cheeked, blue-eyed, shy
and, in appearance, the soul of innocence. That he wasn’t as spotless
as he looked has nothing to do with this story. Toby had saved Tommy
from drowning, and thereafter the younger boy had attached himself to
his benefactor like a shadow. It had been very embarrassing at times,
for saving a person’s life does not necessarily imply that you want to
spend the rest of your life in that person’s company! Toby didn’t like
Tommy, for which there was a reason, but he couldn’t be brutal to him,
and short of being brutal there had seemed no way of evading Tommy’s
doglike devotion and his unwelcome companionship. It had become a joke
to Arnold and a few others, but Toby found it far from that. When June
had brought the end of the school year Toby couldn’t have told you
whether he was more delighted at finishing an Honor Man in his class
or at getting rid of Tommy Lingard!

He had returned this fall with a grim determination to be rid of the
boy at any cost short of murder, but to-day, glancing uneasily about
as he passed from one recitation to another, he was not so sure of
himself. Probably, he reflected discouragedly, when Tommy appeared and
got those big blue eyes on him he wouldn’t find it in his heart to
be unkind to the youngster, and the whole wretched, tiresome program
would begin all over again. Therefore when, hurrying from his last
morning recitation at twelve, he almost bumped into Tommy on the steps
of Oxford, he was at once amazed and relieved when that youth said,
“Hello, Toby,” in a most embarrassed voice and sidled past. At the
foot of the steps Toby stopped and looked back. Could that be Tommy?
Of course it was, but it was a very different Tommy. He had shot up
during the summer like a weed. His clothes looked too small for him,
too short of leg and sleeve. He was thinner of body and face, the
pink-and-white complexion had muddied, the blue eyes were no longer
luminous with truth and innocence and the voice had dropped several
notes to a ridiculous bass! In short, Tommy had changed very suddenly
from a blue-eyed cherub to a commonplace and awkward boy. And Toby was
very, very glad, so glad that he went the rest of the way to Whitson
whistling at the top of his voice; or should I say at the top of his
whistle?

“Just shows,” he reflected as he skipped up the stairs, “that it
doesn’t pay to worry about anything that may happen, because maybe it
won’t!”

After a two o’clock séance with “Old Tige,” by which name Mr. Gaddis,
English instructor, was popularly known, Toby went with Arnold down
to the athletic field. September had still a week to run and the
afternoon was almost uncomfortably hot. Across the river, the wide
expanse of salt marsh was still green in places, and overhead the sky
was unflecked by clouds. Fortunately a little westerly breeze mitigated
the heat. Most of the tennis courts were occupied, a group of baseball
enthusiasts were congregated over by the batting net and on the blue
surface of the curving stream a few bright-hued canoes were moving
slowly upstream or down. Toby found himself almost wishing that he had
chosen a dip in the Sound instead of an hour or more of unexciting
observation of some fourscore overheated youths going through football
practice. However, the new grandstand, finished during the summer,
was roofed, and as soon as Arnold left him to his own devices Toby
meant to climb up there into the shade and sprawl in comfort. On the
way they passed new boys here and there――it was easy to detect them if
only by their too evident desire to seem quite at home――and they agreed
gravely, pessimistically that they were a rum looking lot, and wondered
what the school was coming to! Old friends and acquaintances hailed
them from a distance or stopped to chat. Arnold was rather a popular
fellow and knew a bewildering multitude of his schoolmates.

“Seems mighty nice to be back again,” Arnold observed after one such
meeting. “Bet you we’re going to have a dandy time this year, T.
Tucker.”

“Maybe you will,” answered the other dubiously, “but I don’t expect to
unless they drop Latin from the curriclumum――curric――well, whatever you
call it.”

“Call it the course, old thing,” laughed Arnold. “It’s easier on the
tongue. But I thought you finished strong with Latin last year.”

“I did pretty well in spring term, but it looks tougher this fall. And
I’ve got Collins this year, and every one says he’s a heap stricter
than Townsend.”

“Well, he is, I suppose, but he’s a mighty good teacher. You get ahead
faster with Collins, I think. Anyway, it won’t look so bad when you’ve
got into it, Toby. Besides, I dare say I can help you a bit now and
then.”

“You,” jeered Toby with a very, very hollow laugh. “You’ll be so
full of football for the next two months you won’t know I’m alive!
A nice outlook for me, I don’t think! When I’m not bathing you with
arsenic――or is it arnica?――or strapping your broken fragments together
I’ll have to listen to you yapping about how it was you missed a
tackle, or got your signals mixed. Arn, as a companion you’ll be just
about as much use as a――a――――”

“Don’t overtax that giant intellect of yours, old thing. It’s too hot.
Wonder where the crowd is. You don’t suppose those fellows are all that
are going to report?”

“It’s not three yet. Probably the rest of them preferred to stay
sensibly in the shade while they had the chance. Wish I had! Arn, is
that what’s-his-name over there?”

“No, that’s thingumbob. Whom do you mean?”

“The little man in the blue sweater-coat talking to Fanning. See him?”

“Yes. I guess it must be. Isn’t very big, is he? Fan said last night,
though, that he talked a heap of sense. I’m going over. Come along and
meet him.”

“No, thanks. I’ll wait here.”

Arnold left him by the corner of the old grandstand and made his way
toward where the new coach was in conversation with Captain Fanning.
Toby saw Fanning introduce Arnold to Mr. Lyle and saw the two shake
hands. Then something broad and heavy smote him disconcertingly between
his shoulders and he swung around to find Sid Creel’s grinning,
moon-like countenance before him.

“Hello, Toby!” greeted Sid, reaching for his hand. “I had a beastly
fright. Just when I was lamming you I thought maybe it wasn’t you after
all. You’ve sort of thickened up since last year. Rather embarrassing
to find you’ve whacked a total stranger on the back, eh? Much obliged
to you for being you, Toby. I’ll never forget it. What sort of a summer
did you have? You’re looking hard as nails and more beautiful than
ever!”

“Same to you, Sid. Are you going out for football?” Toby glanced at the
other’s togs.

“No,” replied Sid gravely. “I’m going to tea at the Doctor’s.”

“Well,” laughed Toby, “that was sort of a fool question, but I didn’t
know you were a football shark.”

“I’m not; I’m just a minnow. I’m trying for the Second. I always do.
I’ve been trying for the Second Team for years and years. If I’m not
here they postpone until next day. I should think you’d go in for the
game, Toby. Ever tried it?”

“A little. I was out for the Second last fall, but I didn’t stay long.”

“That so? I don’t remember seeing you.”

“Funny, Sid; there were only about eighty of us the first day!”

“Well, I didn’t know you then, Toby. Why don’t you try again? Didn’t
you like it?”

“I don’t know. Guess I didn’t have time to find out whether I did or
didn’t. They said I was too light and fired me after three or four
days.”

“Well, you certainly have enough weight now. Come on and join the
goats. It’s lots of fun. You get action, son, and it lets you out of
gymnasium work while you’re at it. That’s something! Come on!”

Toby smiled and shook his head. “Guess not, thanks. I never would make
a football player.”

“You? You’re just the kind, Toby. You’re quick and you’ve got a good
head, and you’re built right, too. Wish I had your build. Only thing
I’m good for is center or, maybe, guard. I’m too bulky. It isn’t all
fat, though, believe thou me. Feel them here biceps, son, if you doubt
my word.”

“I kind of envied you your fat――I mean your muscular bulk, Sid――last
winter,” answered Toby. “You could fall flat on the ice without hurting
yourself. You just kind of bounced up and down a few times and didn’t
mind it. When I fell I felt it!”

“Never mind about me bouncing,” said Sid good-naturedly, with a grin.
“I got around the ice a heap faster than some of the chaps at that. But
about football, Toby――――”

“I haven’t got time for it, Sid; that’s another thing. I’ve got to put
my nose to the grindstone, I guess, this year.”

“Well, haven’t I? Rather! But football won’t cut in on studying――much.
Anyway, a fellow studies better for being out-of-doors and getting
plenty of exercise and――――”

“Yes, but I can be outdoors without playing football, Sid.”

“Gee, you’re the original little Excuse-Me! Well so be it. After all,
some one’s got to stay out of it and be audience, and from the looks
of things right now, Toby, you’re the only fellow left to sit in the
grandstand and cheer us on to victory. Look at the gang coming down!
There’s a fellow I want to see. So long! Better change your mind,
though!”

Arnold came back for a minute and then left in answer to the plaintive
squawking of a horn from farther along the side of the field. Fully
eighty youths of assorted ages and sizes gathered about the new coach
and the hubbub was stilled as the small man in the blue knitted jacket
began to speak. Toby could hear an occasional word, but not enough
to make sense, and, since it was no concern of his, he turned toward
the grandstand and climbed up into the grateful shade. Forty or fifty
others had already scattered themselves about the seats in couples or
groups, most of them munching peanuts or popcorn bars, ready to be
amused if amusement required no exertion on their parts. A lazy way to
spend a perfectly good afternoon, reflected Toby. He wished he hadn’t
let Arnold persuade him to come, but, being here, he lacked energy for
the hot uphill walk back to the dormitory. He would stay awhile, he
told himself; at least until the afternoon had cooled a little.

There was a salvo of polite handclapping from the group within sound
of the coach’s voice and it broke up. Andy Ryan, the trainer, emptied
a canvas bag of trickling footballs and they were pounced on and borne
away to various parts of the field. The big group became half a dozen
smaller ones. It was only “kindergarten stuff” to-day, even for the
veterans; passing and falling and starting; not very interesting from
the viewpoint of candidate or audience. Toby located Arnold working
with a squad under big Jim Rose. Arn was, as Toby knew, pretty soft
after a fairly lazy summer, and the boy in the shade of the big stand
smiled unfeelingly as he saw his chum straighten himself slowly in
deference to protesting muscles.

“He will be good and sore to-night,” thought Toby. “Sailing a boat all
summer doesn’t keep a football man in very good trim, I guess!”

After that he lost interest in the scene before him, and, his somewhat
battered straw hat on one knee and the lazy breeze drying his damp
hair, let his thoughts carry him back to Greenhaven and the folks in
the little white cottage on Harbor Road. It would be very pleasant
there to-day on the vine-shaded steps, with the harbor and the white
sails before him and the cheery _click-clock_ of the caulking iron and
mallet and the busy _pip-pup, pip-pup_ of the gasoline engine sounding
across from the boat yard. Better still, though, would it be to lie
in the stern of a boat, main-sheet in hand, and slip merrily out past
the island to where, even to-day, the white-caps would be dancing on
the sunlit surface of the bay. He was getting the least bit homesick
when the sound of approaching steps brought his wandering thoughts
back. Climbing the aisle was a somewhat thin, carelessly dressed youth.
His head was bent and so Toby couldn’t see his face well, but there
was something dimly familiar about the figure. Toby wondered why, with
several hundred empty seats to choose from, the boy, whoever he was,
had to come stamping up here. He sighed and changed his position and
was relapsing into his thoughts again when he saw to his annoyance that
the approaching youth had stopped at the end of his row, two seats
distant. Toby’s gaze lifted curiously to the boy’s face. Perhaps it
was more the two strips of rather soiled surgeon’s plaster adorning
the chap’s upper lip than the features that led Toby to recognize him.
Mentally, Toby groaned. Aloud, trying to make his voice sound decently
friendly, he said: “Hello! Well, how’s it going?”




CHAPTER IV

G. W. TUBB


“Hello,” answered the other gruffly.

To Toby’s further annoyance he slid into the end seat, as he did so
producing a folded but rather crumpled handkerchief from a pocket. This
he held across to Toby.

“’Tain’t very clean,” he said, “but it’s the best I could do.”

“What is it?” asked Toby, accepting it doubtfully. “Oh, I see; my
handkerchief. You needn’t have bothered. I told you to throw it away.
Still, much obliged.” It had quite evidently been washed by the boy
himself and ironed by the simple expedient of laying it while wet on
some smooth surface, perhaps a windowpane. Faint brownish stains had
defied the efforts of the amateur laundryman. Toby dropped it into a
pocket, aware of the close and apparently hostile stare of the other.
“Much obliged,” he repeated vaguely, for want of anything better to
say.

“’At’s all right,” answered the other. “Too good a handkerchief to
throw away.” An awkward silence followed. Toby wished the youth would
take himself off, but that idea was apparently far from the latter’s
mind. Instead, he thrust his hands into the pockets of his trousers,
stretched his thin legs before him and scowled down at the busy scene.
He looked to be about fifteen, Toby thought. His features were not
bad in themselves, but his expression was sullen and dissatisfied and
his complexion was too much the color of putty to be pleasant to look
at. Also, his skin didn’t seem clean and healthy. The same was true
of the youth as a whole. Toby thought a thorough application of hot
water and soap would improve him a whole lot, at least externally. His
clothes were of good enough material and fairly new. But they were
full of creases and needed brushing. His shoes were scratched at the
toes and would have been better for dressing and polishing. His collar
was cleaner than yesterday, but creased and rumpled, and the blue
four-in-hand scarf needed tightening. On the whole, this chap was not
a prepossessing member of Yardley Hall society, and Toby had no desire
to increase the acquaintance. But so long as he was here some sort of
conversation seemed in order, and so, breaking the silence:

“How’s the cut getting on?” Toby asked.

“All right,” the other answered without turning his head. Then: “Say,”
he challenged.

“Yes?”

“Your name’s Tucker, ain’t it?”

“Yes. What’s yours, by the way?” Toby was sorry he had asked as soon as
the question was out.

“Tubb,” was the answer, “George Tubb.” There was a pause. Then,
defiantly: “Middle name’s William. Go on and say it!”

“Say it? Why, George William Tubb,” responded Toby obligingly.

The other turned and viewed him suspiciously. Then he grunted. “Guess
you don’t get it,” he muttered. “George W. Tubb, see?”

“I’m afraid I don’t know what you mean,” answered Toby indifferently.

“You would if you saw it written,” said Mr. Tubb gloomily. “Everybody
does.” He pitched his voice to a falsetto. “‘What’s the W. stand for?
Wash?’ Gee, I’m sick of it. I tried to tell the guy in the office where
you get registered that my middle name was Harris, but he said it
couldn’t be that and begin with W. It’ll be W. in the catalogue, so you
might as well know it now. Well, I’ve been ‘Wash-tub’ ever since I was
a foot high, so I guess it don’t matter here!”

“What’s the difference?” asked Toby. “One nickname’s as good as
another, isn’t it? Names don’t matter.”

“Some don’t. I suppose they call you ‘Red’ or ‘Carrot’ or something
like that. I wouldn’t mind――――”

“Hold on, Tubb!” Toby’s voice dropped a note. “No one calls me what
you said. Some fellows have tried to, but they changed their minds.
Understand?”

Tubb grinned. “Don’t like it, eh? Thought you said names didn’t
matter! Well, I don’t like my nickname any more than you like yours;
I mean what fellows started to call you.” The grin faded and Tubb’s
countenance became overcast again with the settled expression of
sullenness. “Anyway, what they call me here doesn’t cut any ice. I
won’t be here long.”

“How’s that?” asked Toby, trying to make his question sound politely
interested.

“I’m going to beat it. This ain’t any kind of a school for me, Tucker.
Gee, what would I do here? Look at the gang of highbrows and mamma’s
darlings! They’d stand for me about two days. I know the sort. Some
of ’em come to our town in summer. Think they ever have anything to do
with us town guys? Not on your life! We’re too common for ’em, the dear
little Willie Boys!”

“Why did you come here then?” asked Toby coldly.

“It was Pop’s idea,” replied Tubb. “Aunt Sarah died last spring out in
Michigan and she left Pop some money. The will said some of it was to
go for my schooling. I wanted to go to Huckins’s, in Logansport. Know
it? It’s an all-right school and two or three fellows from my town go
there. It don’t cost much, either. But Pop was set on this dive. About
ten years ago Pop was in partnership with a man named Mullins in the
logging business, and this Mullins had a boy who went to school here.
Pop thought a lot of the Mullinses, and when he learned about Aunt
Sarah’s will he said right off I was to go here. He got the high school
principal to coach me all summer. I kept telling him I wouldn’t like it
here, kept telling him it wasn’t any place for a storekeeper’s son, but
he wouldn’t listen. He said he’d lick the hide off me if I didn’t pass
the examinations, and I knew he would. So I passed. He’ll lick me if I
go back home, too, so I’ve got to go and get me a job somewhere. Guess
I’ll enlist in the Navy. I’ll tell ’em I’m seventeen. They don’t care.
I know a fellow got in when he was a couple of months younger than I
am.”

Toby viewed Tubb distastefully during a brief silence. Then: “Seems to
me,” he said slowly and emphatically, “the Navy is just the place for
you, Tubb!”

“Sure,” began the other. Then something in Toby’s tone made him pause
and view the other suspiciously. “What do you mean by that?” he
demanded.

“Just what I said. What you need is discipline, Tubb, and a whole lot
of it, and you’ll get it in the Navy. And I wish them joy of you!” Toby
arose and crowded past to the aisle.

“Ah, go to thunder!” snarled Tubb. “You’re like all the rest of them,
ain’t you? Silk-sox! Who cares what you think? Say, I hope you ain’t
caught anything, sitting alongside me like that!”

There was more, but Toby didn’t hear it. Going down the aisle he
was uncomfortably conscious of the curious looks bent on him by the
occupants of the nearer seats who had been aroused from their sleepy
occupation of following the practice by Tubb’s strident voice. He was
glad when he had reached the ground and turned the corner of the
stand. Passing between the busy tennis courts, he reflected that
befriending strangers didn’t work out very satisfactorily for him.
After this, he decided, smiling whimsically, fellows might drown or be
cut to pieces for all the help he would offer!

Just before supper, when Arnold came back to Number 12, a trifle
washed-out looking and not moving very spryly, Toby narrated the
outcome of the incident in the train. By this time he was able to tell
of the meeting with George W. Tubb with a touch of humor and Arnold
listened amusedly, stretched at length on the window-seat.

“You’re right, Toby, the Navy’s just the place for friend Tubbs.”

“Tubb,” corrected Toby. “There’s only one of him, praise be!”

“We’re getting some strange freaks here of late, anyway,” reflected
Arnold. “There were several on the field this afternoon. Well, it takes
all sorts to make a world――or a football team! Say, T. Tucker, the new
coach is a peach. Fan’s crazy about him, and so are the others. Did
you hear the song-and-dance he gave us before practice? Some sane and
sensible little speech, that was.”

“What did he say?” asked Toby.

“We-ell,” Arnold hesitated, “I don’t know that he said anything much
different from what all coaches say at the start of the season. It
was more the way he said it, I guess. Of course he insisted rather
painfully on hard work, and told us what a fine, intelligent-looking
lot we were.”

“Must be nearsighted,” murmured Toby.

“And said something nice about Fan. Oh, it was much the usual speech,
only――well, it did sound different, somehow. One thing he did say,
though, T. Tucker, may interest you.”

“You may proceed, Mr. Deering.”

“He said he wanted every fellow in school who had the possible making
of a football player in him to report not later than Monday, and that
if they didn’t volunteer he’d draft them! That ought to give you
something to think about, old thing.”

“Meaning that I have somewhere concealed about me the making of a
football player?” asked Toby.

“Exactly. You’d better keep out of Lyle’s way or he will grab you.”

After a moment Toby, who had armed himself with towel and soap-dish
preparatory to a trip to the lavatory, moved to the door but paused
with his hand on the knob. “He can’t draft me, Arn,” he said.

“Why can’t he, I’d like to know?”

“Because I’m going out for the Second to-morrow.”

“_What!_ Honest? When――How――――”

But Toby had closed the door behind him.




CHAPTER V

WITH THE SECOND


Of recent years the custom of having separate organizations for the
First and Second Teams from the very outset of the season had obtained
at Yardley. In the old days the Second was made up, perhaps a fortnight
after the school year had started, of players who were not needed on
the First and those who, for one reason or another, were ineligible for
it. As a result, the Second as an adversary for the First, or School,
Team, never amounted to much until the season was half gone. Under the
new system the Second came into being two or three days after the start
of the fall term, with a coaching staff, small but sufficient, of its
own, a captain elected the preceding year and a general organization
similar to that of the First save as to size. The coach was inevitably
some enthusiastic and patriotic fellow who had recently graduated and
who gave his services free. At times――whenever possible, in fact――he
summoned other graduates to his assistance. If he was a wise coach,
he never had more than one assistant at a time. If he was unwise, he
had――and chaos reigned.

This year the coach was Mr. Burtis. Burtis had, in his time, been
a remarkable half-back and an equally remarkable kicker, both in
preparatory school and college. He had left college last spring and
was, consequently, but twenty-one or twenty-two years of age. Because
Yardley Hall history accorded him much fame as a player and leader, a
great deal was expected of him. Toby’s first look at Kendall Burtis
produced more surprise than anything else. He found himself wondering
how any man could be as utterly homely as the coach and yet look as
attractive, how any one could have so many angles in his body and yet
be so free from awkwardness! Burtis was rather large, ruggedly built,
square of frame. His mouth was broad, his nose somewhat pug, his hair
nondescript in hue. Yet in spite of these things the face was pleasing
and attractive. Perhaps the very dark gray eyes, clear and steady
and honest, were accountable. Or it may be that the mouth expressed
kindliness. At all events, after that first instant of surprise and
confusion, Toby liked the new coach immensely. Whether the new coach
liked Toby I can’t say. It is quite probable that he didn’t see him,
for Toby was only one of some forty-eight fellows drawn up in a group
on the edge of the second diamond that Saturday afternoon.

Toby wondered what words of wisdom would fall from that
generously-proportioned mouth, and he craned his head over Sid Creel’s
shoulder that he might hear them all. What he did hear and see were
hardly worth the exertion. Coach Burtis, a new football snuggled in his
left elbow and his right hand thrust into a pocket of an old pair of
gray trousers, looked pleasantly over the little throng for a moment.
Then: “Well,” he said genially. “It looks like we had material for a
good team here. Let’s get busy!”

That was all. Toby felt a trifle neglected and disappointed. But he
had to acknowledge that perhaps getting busy was as important as
listening to a speech. After that, for more than an hour and a half, he
had very little opportunity for feeling neglected. There were moments
when he wished he might. Coach and captain were both believers in hard
work, and both buckled down resolutely to the task ahead of them.
More than half the material was inexperienced, much of what remained
was useless, and only some twelve or fourteen candidates combined
experience with ability. To-day’s work was the veriest drudgery, and,
although occasional halts were called, yet the September sun did
unkind things to many. Toby, rather to his surprise, discovered that
he was not nearly so hard and fit as he had thought. After ten minutes
of passing and falling, he perspired from every pore, and ere the
afternoon’s practice was finished, he felt very much like a wet rag.
Also, he had somehow managed to develop a painful crick in his left
shoulder, close to his neck. And the muscles in the backs of his legs
felt as if some one had pounded them with a board. On the whole, he
was far less enthusiastic than he had been at three o’clock, and even
the shower failed of much reaction. Dragging a tired body from the
gymnasium across the yard to Whitson, he wondered by just what mental
process he had the day before arrived at the decision to play football!

As a matter of fact, there had been, so far as he could recall, no
mental process at all. Arnold had threatened him with the First Team
draft and almost without reflection he had announced that he was going
out for the Second! Ten minutes before, or even three, he had had no
more idea of a football career than he had had of jumping from the
window. Well, reflected Toby ruefully, it just showed that you couldn’t
be too careful of impulses!

He supposed that Sid Creel was mainly responsible for these aching
muscles. He had resolutely refused to be persuaded by Sid’s arguments,
and yet, apparently, he had been! Or else he had done it just to
surprise Arnold. Maybe that was it. If it was, it was a mighty poor
reason! Any amount of surprise on the part of Arnold wasn’t worth the
soreness of those leg muscles! He groaned as he started up the stairs,
but nearing the door of Number 12, he assumed a carefree and nonchalant
air designed to deceive Arnold in case that youth was within.

He wasn’t, though, and Toby was thankful. It gave him a chance to lie
down on the window seat, groaning as much as he pleased while doing it,
without arousing curiosity. He dropped his cap――he had put by the straw
hat――on the nearest object and divested himself of an unnecessary coat.
It was while he was getting rid of the latter article of apparel that
his eyes fell on an envelope propped against the base of the droplight
on his side of the table. It bore his name in funny up-and-down
characters, like the writing of a boy of ten, and the postmark showed
that it was mailed in Wissining that morning. Of course, it might be
only an invitation to deal at one of the few local stores, but there
was evidence against that premise; such as the lack of any address in
the corner, the queer writing and a brownish smudge along the flap
suggesting that unclean hands had sealed the envelope. He bore it
to the window seat, settled himself cautiously against the pile of
cushions, stretched his aching legs out and tore open the letter. A
single sheet of blue-ruled paper emerged. Toby read it frowningly.

    Dear Tucker: I’m sorry for what I said this afternoon. I didn’t
    mean it because you are the only fellow at this place who has
    been decent towards me since I came here. I got mad and I
    wish I hadn’t and I’m sorry. I wish you’d forgive me, please,
    Tucker. I guess what you said was true about the Navy, I mean,
    and maybe I’ll do like I said. Every one here shows plain that
    I am not wanted at this school and I guess the sooner I beat it
    the better. If more fellows were like you maybe I could stick
    it out. I am not afraid of the studies. It is not that, but the
    fellows here are not my kind I suppose. You are not either, but
    you acted like you did not think much about that. I am just
    writing this because you were decent to me in the train that
    day, more than any other fellow has been, and I do not want
    you to think I am no good at all, with no gratitude. If I do
    not see you again, good-by and good luck, from Yours Truly,
    Geo. W. Tubb.

Toward the end of the queer epistle Toby’s frown disappeared, and when
he had read it once he read it again. After that he laid it down and
looked out over the woods below the railroad cut, at the foot of the
Prospect, and so to the blue expanse of Long Island Sound. A sail boat
dipped slowly along the shore and afar out a cocky tug was leading a
draggled parade of three coal barges. Presently the frown crept back
again, and he lifted the letter, folded it and put it back in its
envelope.

“Suppose I ought to answer it,” he thought, “only, what can I say? Tell
him I don’t mind what he said, I suppose, although it happens that I do
mind. At least, I ought to. He’s a very objectionable, soggy-minded,
unclean fellow, and I don’t want any more to do with him. Still, that
doesn’t say that he isn’t having a horribly messy time here. Of course
fellows don’t take to him. He looks dirty and bad-tempered and he talks
worse than he looks. He doesn’t belong here. Seems to realize it, too.
Shows he has some sense, doesn’t it? Well, I didn’t say he didn’t have
sense. Trouble with him is he’s been left to do as he likes too much,
I guess. Bet you I know that father of his. Severe as anything when
things go wrong, and the rest of the time doesn’t pay any attention to
the kid. He didn’t say anything about a mother or brothers or sisters.
Probably there’s just the two of them in one of those mean little towns
where nothing ever happens that’s worth while. Bet you there isn’t
even a movie theater there! Dad puts out the lamp at nine o’clock and
goes to bed and the kid has to go, too, and the only way he can have
any excitement is to sneak down the rain-spout and get into mischief!
Oh, well, it’s no affair of mine. Still, I am sort of sorry for Tubb.
‘Washtub.’ Beastly nickname! Wonder who his adviser is. Probably hasn’t
been near him, and would only growl and be ugly if he went. Best thing
can happen to George W. Tubb is to seek pastures new.”

Toby yawned and closed his eyes. The faint breath of cool evening air
that blew in through the open window beside him made him feel very
sleepy. He would write a couple of lines to Tibb――no, Tubb――after
supper. Tell him it’s all right, and――――

Toby fell asleep.

Ten minutes later he dreamed that he was falling down innumerable
flights of stairs, bounding from one to another with ever increasing
momentum. He didn’t seem concerned about the process of falling, but he
knew that when he reached the bottom, if he ever did, there would be
an awful smash! In case there shouldn’t be enough left of him to groan
then, maybe he had better do it now. So he did, quite frightfully. And
opened his eyes to find Arnold and Frank tugging at him and laughing.

“Wake up, Toby! It isn’t true!”

“N-no,” agreed Toby doubtfully. “But――I’m glad you stopped me before I
got to the bottom!”

“Nightmare?” asked Frank. “I have it sometimes. Get a move on. We’re
going to get supper early and beat it over to Greenburg for the first
house at the movies.”

“I don’t see any use in my spending good money to see movies,” demurred
Toby, sitting up sleepily, “when all I’ve got to do is go to sleep and
have movies of my own!”

Arnold grinned. “How did practice go?” he asked significantly.

“Fine.” Toby was quite cheerful and nonchalant. “Made me sleepy,
though, I guess.”

“Hope you’re not tired or lame or anything like that? You had such a
lot of fun ragging me yesterday, you know. Too bad if _you_――er――――”

“Me? Oh, well, it was pretty warm, of course, but when you’re in good
hard condition――――”

“What’s the matter?” asked Arnold, grinning.

“Matter? Why?”

“I thought you made a face when you stood up. My mistake, of course!”

“I don’t know what you’re getting at,” declared Toby with great
dignity. “If you think that a little football practice――_ouch! Gee!_”
He sat down again on the window seat and rubbed his back ruefully,
while the others laughed with wicked glee.

“It won’t do, old thing! There’s no use stalling. You’re as bad as I
was yesterday, when you had the beautiful cheek to sit there and read
me a lecture on not keeping fit! Where does it hurt worst?”

“All over,” groaned Toby. “I’ll be all right after I move around
a while, though. That’s one advantage of being in fine physical
condition: you may get a bit lame but you get right over it!”

“Isn’t he the wonderful bluffer?” asked Arnold admiringly to Frank.
“Well, go ahead and move around, old thing. It’s five minutes of, and
we want to get over there before seven.”

“Tell me one thing first,” begged Toby, squirming about from his waist
up. “Do they have cushions on the seats at the movie house?”

“Oh, yes, and they’ll give you a couple of pillows at the ticket office
if you ask for ’em,” answered Frank. “Hustle now!”

“What you tell me sounds perfectly beautiful,” said Toby sadly, “but
I’m afraid it isn’t true.”

Thereupon Arnold thrust towel and soap into his hands, Frank held the
door open and between them they pushed him, groaning and remonstrating,
into the corridor and headed him toward the lavatory.

“It’s really an awful joke on him,” chuckled Arnold as Toby’s lagging
footsteps receded down the hall. “He thought he was as hard as nails,
and had a fine time crowing over me yesterday. Said it took more than
sailing a boat to keep a fellow in shape!”

“I guess the only way to keep fit enough for football,” said Frank,
feelingly, “is to chop trees all summer. I was just about all in last
night. How did you manage to persuade him to take up football, anyway,
Arn? I thought he was dead set against it.”

“So did I. _I_ didn’t persuade him. I don’t know who did――or what! He
sprung it on me suddenly yesterday. I’m glad, though. I think there’s a
good football player in Toby, Frank.”




CHAPTER VI

SIGNALS


Although Toby was back in Whitson before nine that evening, it is
needless to say that the note he had promised himself to write to
George Tubb did not get written. In fact Toby forgot all about it until
the next morning, when Arnold found Tubb’s letter on the floor and
asked Toby if it was anything he wanted to keep.

“No, throw it in the basket,” answered Toby. “Hold on, though! Guess
I’ll keep it. I’ve got to answer it to-day. Stick it on the table, Arn.”

Later it got buried under a book and so during the course of a busy day
or two Toby again forgot it. He might have remembered it on Sunday,
which, as at every preparatory school in the land, was the recognized
letter-writing day of the week at Yardley, but he didn’t. He wrote to
his folks in the afternoon until Arn, who never spent much time on his
correspondence, dragged him away to the river and a certain shining
blue canoe. Then he finished the epistle in the evening just before
bedtime, and retired with a fine feeling of duty performed. Monday
witnessed a change in temperature. There was a light frost on the
ground when Toby and Arnold hurried over to chapel, and, although the
middle of the day was bright and warm, by the time practice began on
the gridirons there was enough nip in the air to make work with the
pigskin more agreeable.

Toby found himself on a squad of fellows of much his own age and
football experience――or lack of it. It didn’t seem to him that he
showed much promise of ever being better than a dub at the game, and
while he did rather enjoy the work, he was not vastly concerned over
the prospect of being dropped. He had been dropped very promptly last
fall, and he expected a similar fate this season. Of course, he was
heavier now than then, but he guessed football required something more
than weight of a fellow. Sid Creel was playing center on another squad
in signal drill that Monday afternoon, so far as Toby could discern,
conducting himself in a highly meritorious fashion. Sid had weight and,
apparently, ability, and Toby decided that this year his good-natured
perseverance was to be rewarded.

After three quarters of an hour of “baby-play” the Second Team
candidates were summoned to the bench and Coach Burtis announced the
first scrimmage. “Who have we for center on B Team, Harris?” he asked
the trainer.

“Center? Well, there’s Galvin and that tow-headed chap over there,
Coach. And Creel. Creel’s got the build, all right. Want to try him?”

“Yes. And Burnett and Hodgson for guards. And――what’s your name, you
chap?”

“Thorson, sir.”

“Well, Thorson, you take left tackle on B. I want another tackle now.
Who wants to play tackle? All right, I’ll take you: the fellow in the
green sweater. Now, a couple of ends, Harris. Yes, they’ll do. Burns at
quarter. Come on, Burns! And Folwell and――――”

“Nelson’s played half, Mr. Burtis,” suggested Grover Beech.

“I want him on A Team. Who else is there? Fosdick? All right. And that
fellow down there, whatever his name is, for full-back. All right, get
out there, fellows! You referee, Harris, please. I’ll be ump. I want
all the rest of you chaps to follow the play closely and learn all you
can. We’ll play two ten-minute periods, Harris. Team A takes the ball
and north goal. Now then, let’s see what you fellows know about the
game!”

At first it didn’t seem that they knew very much, for signals went
wrong, fumble followed fumble and the players became occasionally so
inextricably mixed up that scrimmage had to be halted while they were
disentangled. But Coach Burtis, alternately umpire and critic, was
possessed of a vast patience, and toward the last of the first ten
minutes things went better. Team A worked down to the opponent’s twelve
yards and would have scored if the line had held. But a B Team tackle
trickled through and laid White on his back before he was well started
on a wide run, and after that Frick, quarter-back on the attacking
side, missed a try-at-goal by many yards.

A five-minute rest followed, during which the coach and the trainer
and Grover Beech lectured and criticized, and then, with many changes
in each line-up, the scrimmage began again. Toby still decorated a
bench, looking rather colorful with his red thatch obtruding from a
blue blanket. Toby had dutifully watched the efforts of the players,
but it cannot be truthfully said that he learned much. Perhaps he was
too attentive to the performance and fortunes of Sid Creel at center
on Team B. Sid appeared to be playing his position rather well,
Toby thought, although he didn’t pretend to be anything of a judge.
At least, Sid lasted longer than most fellows of his team, returning
breathless to the bench only when the last period was more than half
over. He squirmed into a place beside Toby, pulling a blanket about his
broad shoulders.

“I guess he didn’t have much on me,” Sid panted, “if he is ten pounds
heavier!”

“Who?” asked Toby.

“Watson. He didn’t get past me once, and I turned him twice. Did you
notice?”

“Who’s Watson? Their center?”

“Yes. If they’d given us a couple of decent guards we’d have put it all
over that bunch. Burnett isn’t so bad, but Hodgson laid down every time
any one looked at him! You didn’t get in, did you? What are you trying
for?”

“That’s what I’ve been wondering, Sid.”

“I mean what position.”

“How do I know? End, I suppose. Or half. Search me!”

“Well, you’d better make up your mind. When Coach yells for an end the
next time, sing out and race on there. That’s the only way you’ll get a
chance. Beat the other fellow to it, Toby.”

“I’d be afraid he’d take me,” answered Toby dryly. “I don’t know any
more about playing end than――than you do center!”

Sid grinned. “You watch me, Toby. I’m going to fade Watson before this
season’s much older, my child. Honest, I really believe I’ve got a
chance to stick this year. Of course, it’s a bit early yet, but――――”

“What’s he yelling?” interrupted Toby. Play had paused, a youth was
limping to the side-line and Coach Burtis was shouting toward the bench.

“Quarter,” said Sid. He looked left and right along the benches. Here
and there a player squirmed indecisively but none appeared to have
enough courage to offer his services. “Guess all the quarters are used
up,” mused Sid.

Trainer Harris added his voice to the coach’s. “Aren’t there any
quarter-backs over there? Get a move on, somebody! Any of you!”

“Coming!” shouted Toby, throwing aside his blanket and jumping to his
feet.

“He said quarter, you idiot!” hissed Sid. “You aren’t a quarter!”

“How do you know?” laughed Toby. “_I_ don’t!”

“All right, this way,” greeted the Coach, as Toby raced on. “What’s the
name?”

“Tucker, sir.”

“Ever played quarter, Tucker?”

“No, sir.”

“Well, then what the mischief――――”

“Trainer said any of us, sir.”

Mr. Burtis frowned, smiled and nodded shortly. “Go ahead then. Let’s
see what you can do. Know the signals?”

“Yes, sir.” Toby was pretty certain that he had forgotten them, but it
wouldn’t do to say so! Turning, he caught the amused smile of Captain
Beech. Toby dropped the lid of his left eye gravely and stepped to
position behind center.

“Look what you’re doing, Tucker,” warned the coach. “Third down and
four to go.” There was amusement in his tone and Toby flushed. Third
down and four, he thought hurriedly. That meant that a line play wasn’t
the thing. What was, then? He hesitated and glanced doubtfully at the
backs. The trainer blew his whistle. Something had to be done and done
quickly. If B Team hadn’t been having luck with A’s line there was no
use trying to get four yards between tackles, even on a third down.
The teams were near the middle of the field, and A had three men back,
evidently expecting an open play. Then why not――――

“14――23――8――――” Toby’s voice sounded very weak and small to Toby.
“14――23――――”

“_Signals! Signals!_” The whole back-field was remonstrating, it
seemed! His heart sank. He had got his signals wrong! But how? No, he
was right. It was the others who were wrong!

“Signals!” he cried, scowling at the nearer of the three backs behind
him. “14――27――8――196――――”

The team awoke to action. Full-back dashed headlong upon him, took
the pass and went, twisting and boring, into the mêlée. Toby threw
himself behind, triumphant. His signals _had_ been right, just as he
had known! (It wasn’t until after practice was over that he learned
that he had changed them the second time!) The play went through for
well over three yards, the unfeasible for once proving feasible, and
B Team exulted and looked approval at Toby. Toby tried to be modest
about it, which, considering that he had called for the play in sheer
desperation, not remembering at the moment anything else to call for,
wasn’t hard! Some one, too, had walked on his face, and that helped him
toward humility.

Realizing that he had established a reputation for generalship, Toby
tried hard to live up to it, but although B did not get the necessary
eighteen inches or so on the next down, the succeeding play failed
dismally and B lost nearly all she had gained. Toby tried to assure
himself that the fault was the right half-back’s, but something told
him that an end run from balanced formation was predestined to fail
and that another time he would remember that there was such thing as
a shift! Perhaps he would have vindicated the reputation gained from
his first lucky play if the scrimmage hadn’t ended then and there; or
perhaps he would have become exposed for the impostor he knew himself
to be. At all events, Toby welcomed the whistle heartily.

Afterwards, in the gymnasium, Grover Beech detained him on his way from
the shower. “Snappy work, Tucker,” he said, smilingly. “Glad to see you
with us.”

Toby reflected the other’s smile in somewhat sickly fashion. “Thanks,”
he answered lamely. “Of course, I didn’t know anything about playing
quarter, Beech――――”

“Well, you got away with it, anyway! That’s the main thing. And that
plunge at guard when we were looking for a pass was clever strategy.”
There was a twinkle in his eye, however. Toby’s smile broadened.

“Have a heart!” he begged. “I didn’t know whether that play was going
to right or left, Beech!”

“Well, I’m glad it went to the right,” laughed the Second Team captain,
“for if it had come my way I’d have been just as unready for it as Weld
was! Going to try for quarter, Tucker?”

“Gee, no! I’ve had all I want of it, thanks. I just did it as a sort
of joke. I’m no football player, Beech, and you’ll miss my shining
countenance in a day or two.”

“Oh, I hope not,” answered the other. “Better stick it out.”

“And you will, if I have my say,” he added to himself as Toby went off.




CHAPTER VII

TOBY MAKES A CALL


That evening Tubb’s letter fell to the floor when Toby moved a book on
the study table, and Toby, with a qualm of conscience, rescued it and
re-read it, a perplexed frown on his countenance. Then he drew a pad of
paper toward him and poised his pen above it. But that is as far as he
got. After a minute of thought he put the pen down and resolutely, if
reluctantly, pushed back his chair. “How late is the office open, Arn?”
he asked.

“Eight, I think,” replied his roommate, without raising his eyes from
his work. “What’s the matter?”

“Nothing. I――just want to find out where some one lives. Back after a
bit.”

Toby made his way downstairs and followed the walk to Oxford. At the
end of the corridor the ground-glass panel marked “Office” still glowed
with light, and when Toby pushed it open, Mr. Forisher, the secretary,
was still at work beyond the railing. Toby made known his wants and
the secretary silently pointed with his pen toward a list tacked
to a board beside the door. The names of the students were there,
arranged alphabetically, and Toby found the T’s and went down the list:
Tolliver, Tooker, Traine, Tubb, Tucker――――

“Whoa!” murmured Toby. “‘Tubb, G. W., Fremont, N. H., 4 C., W. 31.’
What do you know? Right over my head! That’s the room Felter and Dunphy
had last year. He and I are side by side on the list. Hope that isn’t a
what-you-call-it――omen!” He retraced his steps to Whitson and ascended
two flights of worn stairs. The upper corridor awakened memories,
some pleasant, some otherwise. As ever, it was but dimly lighted by a
single gas-jet near the head of the stairs, and its farther ends were
pockets of gloom. For some reason electricity as a lighting method
had never penetrated to Whitson, although the other buildings had it.
Toby glanced toward the door of his old room ere he turned his back
to it and made his way along the rough boards of the hall. Number 31
was on the front of the building, about halfway between stair-well and
corridor end. It was too dark to read the single card thumb-tacked to
the portal and Toby knocked instead. There was a noticeable interim
of silence before a voice that was strange to the caller called an
ungracious “Come in!”

Toby accepted the invitation. The only light in the room came from the
green-shaded droplight on the littered table directly before the door,
and its radius was small, leaving most of the room in shadow. For a
moment Toby thought he had imagined the voice and that the room was
empty. Then, however, his eyes accustoming themselves to the gloom, he
saw a blur of white and gray beyond the table that gradually evolved
into the form of George Tubb. Tubb was minus coat and waistcoat, and
one suspender had escaped from a shoulder.

“Hello,” said Toby uncertainly. There was something in the strained
silence of the room that made him uncomfortable. “I got your note,
Tubb,” he went on awkwardly, “and I meant to answer it――――”

“That’s all right,” growled Tubb. “Forget it. I had a brain-storm.”

Toby had advanced to the side of the table, and now his host was
plainly revealed. Tubb had a towel in one hand and with it, as he
spoke, he dabbed at his face. Each time the towel came away there was a
new stain on it.

“Hasn’t that cut healed yet?” asked Toby in surprise.

“Doesn’t look so, does it?” muttered Tubb. He pulled the dropped
suspender over his shoulder and turned as though in search of his coat.

“But――――” began Toby.

“It was all right till I landed on it!” interrupted a strident voice
from the other side of the room. “I hope he bleeds to death!”

Startledly, Toby swung about and peered into the shadows. Tubb laughed
mirthlessly. “That’s what I’ve got to live with,” he announced. “Its
name’s Ramsey. Have a look at it, Tucker. Show the gentleman your face,
Percy.”

“You big bully! You――you country jay! You wait! I’ll get square, all
right. You’ll have――――”

“What is this?” broke in Toby, disgusted and resentful. “You fellows
been scrapping?” He stepped around to where the second occupant of the
room could be discerned beyond the confusing radiance of the droplight.
The appearance of the unhealthily-stout youth confronting him answered
the question. Ramsey’s nose was bleeding profusely, and an already
overworked handkerchief was doing little to disguise the fact. The
boy’s face, pale save for flaming disks of red about the cheek bones,
was convulsed with childish, helpless passion, and his dark eyes
flashed as venomously as a snake’s.

“You ought to be proud of your friend,” he exclaimed in a voice still
high and trembling with anger. “The country jay! All he can do is
call names and――and use his fists. I’ll get even, though! I guess the
faculty will have something to say! I’ve stood all I’m going to from
the dirty-neck――――”

“Drop it!” shouted Tubb, springing toward him. Toby pushed him back.

“Listen, you two,” he said vehemently. “There’s been enough of this.
I don’t know what it’s all about, but you ought both to be ashamed of
yourselves. Any one would think you were a couple of――of gutter kids!
This sort of thing doesn’t go here, and you’d better learn that right
now. Get a towel, Ramsey, and wash your face. Best way to stop that
bleeding is to keep a cold bandage there. You――――”

“No one asked your advice,” sputtered Ramsey. “He’s broken my nose――――”

“I hope so,” growled Tubb. “I’d like to break your fat neck, Percy!”

“That’s what he does!” Ramsey fairly shrieked. “You heard him! He’s
always doing it! I’m going to the Office――――”

“What is it he’s always doing?” asked Toby, puzzled and impatient.
Ramsey became incoherent; but Tubb, with a laugh of derision, explained.

“He doesn’t like being called Percy.”

“Then why――――”

“Because that’s what he is, a regular Percy. Besides, Percy isn’t any
worse than Horace, and that’s his real name!”

“Yes, and you call me by it! I’d rather be named Horace than Tubb any
day! At least, I wash my neck sometimes, and that’s more than you do,
you dirty――――”

“I told you to drop it,” growled Tubb, again trying to push past Toby.
“I’m as clean as you are, you fat sissy! One more crack about my neck
and I’ll finish you for keeps!”

“No, you won’t do anything of the kind,” said Toby severely. “Stop
calling each other names and keep quiet a minute. The first thing you
know you’ll have a faculty up here! What’s the matter with you fellows?
Are you crazy?”

“He’s always nagging me!” Ramsey’s wrath was turning to grief, and
there was a sob in his voice. “He’s always calling me Percy――――”

“Then let me alone,” retorted Tubb. “It’s bad enough having to room
with a mother’s pet like you, without getting your lip all the time.
I’ve warned you fifty times, haven’t I? Tell the truth now! Haven’t I
told you over and over that I wouldn’t stand for your sneers and your
silly jokes?”

“I’m not afraid of you, you big――――”

“Stop!” commanded Toby sternly. “I’ll take a hand myself now, and the
first one of you who calls names will get a licking from me. I mean it.
It may not be my business, but I’m going to make it that. Tubb, you sit
down in that chair. Ramsey, you sit in the other one.”

Tubb, with a fleeting grin, obeyed unhesitatingly. Horace Ramsey looked
rebellious, muttered, smeared his face anew with the gory handkerchief
and finally subsided. There was no lavatory on the third floor of
Whitson and the rooms up there were supplied with washstands. Toby
poured water from pitcher to bowl and soaked a towel in it. Silence
reigned save for occasional muffled gasps from Ramsey. Toby wrung the
towel half dry.

“Hold that tight to your nose, Ramsey, and keep your head back as
far as you can,” he directed. Ramsey twitched his heavy shoulders
resentfully, but Toby tipped his chin back and planked the folded
towel over the leaking nose. “That’s it. Hold it there with your hand.
It will stop in a minute, I guess. Anyway, cold water will take the
soreness out.”

“Yes, it will,” snuffled Ramsey. “I don’t think! He’s broken it, I tell
you! I ought to see the doctor.”

“Oh, I don’t think so,” replied Toby reassuringly. “Noses don’t break
very easily. They feel broken lots of times when they’re just bruised.”

“I didn’t hit him hard enough――――” began Tubb.

“You did, too! You――you hammered me!”

“No, I didn’t,” the other growled, “but I will the next time!”

“There isn’t going to be any next time,” said Toby quietly. He found a
chair beside one of the beds and set it in front of the belligerents.
Secretly, he was rather amused at the rôle he had assumed. He was no
more than a year older than Tubb, and he might be Ramsey’s senior by
even less; and he was far from certain that, should he be required to
fulfill his threat, he was much more than a match for Tubb when it came
to a fight. But he kept his doubts to himself and viewed the two with
assurance. “Let’s get this cleared up now,” he went on pleasantly. “You
two fellows will have to room together at least until Christmas recess,
and you might just as well make up your minds to do it peacefully.
What’s your objection to Tubb, Ramsey? You shut up, Tubb: you’ll have
your say in a minute.”

“He doesn’t like me,” said Ramsey, after a moment’s hesitation, “and
he’s always nagging at me. He calls me Percy and makes fun of me
because I wear decent socks and underwear and things――――”

“You ought to see ’em,” muttered Tubb scathingly.

“Please!” said Toby. “Ramsey’s doing the talking now. And what else,
Ramsey?”

“Well, he’s――he’s always at it! It would make any fellow mad, I guess!
And he says I’m fat!”

“All right. Now, Tubb, what’s your grouch?”

“Oh, he makes me sick, Tucker! Look at him! How’d you like to live with
him all the time? Looks like a fat white toad!”

“I’d rather be a toad――――” But Ramsey stopped under Toby’s warning
look, and subsided in mutters.

“He says I don’t wash my neck and that I’m a country greenhorn,”
resumed Tubb. “He’s one of these Willie Boys from the city who think
they know it all. He wears lavender and old-rose socks and the cutest
little union suits you ever saw, Tucker. And――oh, he makes me tired!”

“Fine!” said Toby. “Now I’ll talk.” He turned to Ramsey. “Tubb says
you’re fat, and so you are, Ramsey. You’re disgustingly soft and fat.
You ought to be ashamed of it. If I were you I’d get rid of twenty
pounds if I had to lose sleep to do it. Stop eating sweet stuff for a
month, get outdoors and exercise. As for lavender socks, that’s your
affair. If you don’t like being called Percy, don’t act Percy.” He
turned to Tubb. “Ramsey says you don’t wash your neck, Tubb, and you
don’t. At least, you don’t wash it enough. It’s not clean. I’ve noticed
that myself. As for being from the country, why, you are, aren’t you?
There’s nothing to be ashamed of in that, and if you aren’t ashamed of
it you won’t mind being reminded of it. Now the real trouble with you
two fellows is just this. You are both of you too much concerned with
yourselves. You need to think about something else for awhile. Neither
of you has a good big interest in life, and you need one. Know any
game, Ramsey?”

“Game?” repeated the boy vaguely.

“Well, sport, then. Ever play football or tennis or golf?”

“I’ve played tennis,” said Ramsey uninterestedly. “I don’t care for
sports.”

“You don’t need to tell me that. But wouldn’t you rather play tennis
or golf, or even football, than have to take an hour in the gymnasium
every day?”

“I don’t think so,” muttered Ramsey.

“You’ll change your mind presently, then. What about you, Tubb? You’ve
played baseball, I guess.”

“Sure.”

“Football?”

“Some.”

“Good enough! I’ll get you started to-morrow. Got any togs?”

Tubb shook his head. “I didn’t bring ’em. They weren’t――weren’t dressy
enough for this dump!”

“Can you afford to buy some new ones?”

“Yes, if I want to.” Tubb sounded defiant.

“Get some to-morrow before three, then. There are two or three stores
in Greenburg where you can get fixed up. I’ll come up here for you at
three sharp. What hour have you got free in the morning, Ramsey, on
Tuesdays?”

“Nine to ten,” replied Ramsey, after consideration.

“Good! So have I. Meet me at the tennis courts at five past nine.
Got a racket?” Ramsey nodded. “All right. That’s settled. Now I want
you fellows to promise me something.” He eyed them both sternly. “I
want you to promise me that you’ll both keep silent the rest of the
evening. You’re not to speak a word, either of you, until you wake
up in the morning. That is,” he added, smiling, “after I go. And I’m
going now. Nine-five at the courts, Ramsey. Three sharp up here, Tubb.
Good-night!”

A sort of dazed silence held them both until the door was almost shut
on Toby. Then:

“Good-night,” stammered Ramsey, and:

“Go to thunder!” growled Tubb.




CHAPTER VIII

TUBB TRIES FOOTBALL


Arnold was interested and amused, but he didn’t approve, and he said
so. “You’ll have those freaks hanging around your neck for the rest
of the year, T. Tucker,” he remonstrated. “You can’t make over a poor
thing like this Tubb, or the other chap, from what you say of him. What
do you expect to do? Play tennis with Rumsey――――”

“Ramsey,” Toby corrected meekly.

“_Rum_ is more like it, I guess,” accepted Arnold grimly. “Anyhow, do
you mean to take him on at tennis every day until he loses his fat
and――and finds a soul? Besides, you can’t play tennis for beans!”

“N-no, but I dare say I’m good enough for Ramsey. Oh, I guess I have
made a _faux pas_, as we say in French, but, hang it, Arn, you can’t
see a couple of idiots making fools of themselves――――”

“Idiots generally are fools, aren’t they? Look here, Toby, something’s
gone wrong with your alleged intellect. You didn’t used to hunt trouble
like this. You were beautifully――er――what’s the word?――beautifully
aloof. Used to mind your own business better than any chap I ever knew.
Now look at you! Going out of your way to get mixed up with all sorts
of queer fellows like this Tubb and this other freak. Isn’t young
Lingard enough of a warning to you?”

“Tommy doesn’t love me any more,” answered Toby pathetically. “And I
just must have affection, Arn!”

“Affection!” grunted his chum. “What you need is a swift kick, my son!
All right, all right, go on with your missionary work, but don’t ask me
to help you out. And, for the love of lemons, Toby, don’t have these
weird friends of yours in here!”

“Well, I shan’t encourage them to call, but, of course, Arn, if they
should――――” Toby smiled innocently.

“Well, if they do I’ll beat it. Now shut up and let me study this
beastly math.”

But although Toby pretended to be undisturbed by Arnold’s predictions,
secretly he was regretful. Why, he wondered, as he tried to fix his
mind on the subject of French nouns, had he insisted on assuming the
part of guide and mentor to those two unpromising chaps in Number 31?
Of course, neither of them would keep the engagements he had made for
them. Things wouldn’t happen as easy as that. Well, in that case he
would have a good excuse to drop them, he reflected. After all, it
wasn’t his business to look after their welfare. Besides, he was going
to be far too busy, what with lessons and football, to fuss with them.
Busy? Gee, he’d say he was! He meant to go after another scholarship
this term, and that meant real work. He ought never to have taken on
football. It wasn’t worth risking a scholarship for. No, sir, it just
wasn’t! And he’d drop it the end of the week surely――if it didn’t drop
him first!

To his surprise, Ramsey was awaiting him at the tennis courts when
he reached them, a minute or two late, the next forenoon. Ramsey was
appropriately attired in white flannels and looked less objectionable
this morning, even though his nose was still somewhat larger than
normal. He greeted Toby rather sheepishly, as if ashamed of having kept
the appointment. But Toby pretended that there was nothing unusual in
the situation, and greeted Ramsey cheerily. Perhaps he was a little
bit disappointed at finding the other there, though. If he was we can
scarcely blame him.

Ramsey proved to be a better player than Toby had anticipated. He had
a puzzling service and a good back-hand stroke, and was rather crafty
at placing. In short, if Ramsey had had half as much speed as science
he would have run away with the first set. As it was, Toby finally
captured it, 7 to 5. Ramsey wasn’t enthusiastic about a second set, but
Toby refused to heed his reluctance and they went at it again. Now,
however, Ramsey’s skill was more than offset by weariness, and Toby did
pretty much as he liked with his opponent. He might have secured the
victory very easily, but he purposely allowed Ramsey to take the fourth
and sixth games, determined that the latter’s first dose should be a
strong one. The morning was sufficiently warm to put even Toby in a
perspiration, and Ramsey literally oozed moisture. The second set went
as far as 4 to 2 and then recitations called them back to Oxford. There
had been little conversation during the playing, but returning up the
hill Ramsey became rather communicative.

“I guess I could beat you, Tucker,” he said, mopping his flushed face
with a sodden handkerchief, “if I wasn’t so out of practice. I haven’t
played much for a couple of years. My heart isn’t very strong, you see,
and my mother doesn’t like me to do much of it. In fact, one set at a
time is my usual limit.”

“Yes, you’d beat me easily if you weighed fifteen pounds less,” agreed
Toby. “Who told you your heart isn’t strong?”

“Why, I don’t know,” replied the other vaguely. “It’s always been
that way, ever since I was a kid. Mother says I had scarlet fever or
something when I was five or six, and that sort of weakened it. I dare
say it isn’t really dangerous, you know, but you can’t help thinking
about it sometimes. I get tired very easily. It was about all I could
do to keep on my feet toward the last, back there. My breath gives out
and my heart gets to pounding horribly. I’m strong enough other ways,
though.”

Toby surveyed him gravely. “You would be if you took care of yourself,”
he said. “If you didn’t eat too much and took plenty of exercise you’d
do, I guess. You’re as soft as a lump of dough now, though,” he added
unfeelingly. “How much do you weigh?”

“I don’t know. I haven’t been weighed for a long time.” Ramsey’s tone
was aggrieved.

“Run into the gym the first chance you get and find out. And make a
note of it, Ramsey. Well, see you again. I enjoyed playing. Maybe we
can have another game some day.” He was purposely careless and vague,
and found his reward in the flicker of disappointment in Ramsey’s eyes.

“I’d like it, too,” murmured the boy. “I suppose you’re pretty busy,
though.”

“Fairly, yes. I tell you what, I’ll drop around some evening and
we’ll compare schedules. Maybe we can get in an hour now and then in
the mornings. If I were you, though, Ramsey, I’d try to find some
fellow to play with meanwhile. Take your racket down to the court in
the afternoon and hang around. You can generally run across some one
looking for a game. So long!”

They parted in the corridor and Toby, hurrying along the west hall,
told himself that perhaps, after all, Horace Ramsey was worth troubling
about. Anyway, no harm had been done, and if Ramsey did take up tennis
again positive good would result. All the boy needed was to get rid of
a lot of fat by healthful exercise and wise eating. “Got to get that
bum heart notion out of his head, though,” Toby added. “Probably got
as good a heart as I have, or any other chap. Fine scheme to bring
a boy up with the idea that he can’t play tennis or take exercise
because his heart is weak! Swell way to strengthen it, loafing around
and eating everything that’s rich and soggy! Of course, he may have
something wrong with it; it’s possible; but I don’t believe it. I’ll
get him to go to Mr. Bendix and see what he says.”

At three o’clock Toby rapped on the portal of Number 31 according to
agreement. Tubb bade him enter. Tubb was not, as Toby observed, ready
for football. In fact, Tubb didn’t look to be ready for anything but to
make himself disagreeable. Ramsey was not there.

“Thought you were going to be all ready,” announced Toby as he closed
the door behind him. “Get a move on, Tubb, it’s three now. Where are
your togs?”

“I didn’t get any,” answered the other defiantly.

“Why not? Didn’t they have them? Did you try――――”

“Oh, what’s the use? I’m not going out for football. What chance would
I have? I don’t know any one and I haven’t any pull. And I ain’t much
good at it, anyway.”

“You can learn, can’t you? There isn’t time to argue about it, Tubb.
You can get your togs to-morrow. I’ll get you fixed out all right for
to-day. I’ve got an old pair of pants in my locker, and we can borrow
shoes. You’ve got an old sweater, haven’t you?”

“I’ve changed my mind,” growled Tubb stubbornly.

“I haven’t,” replied Toby pleasantly. “Come on now! We’ve got
to hustle! I told them I was going to bring you, and they’ll be
disappointed if I don’t.”

Tubb inelegantly expressed unbelief. “Told who?” he demanded.

“Never mind who,” said Toby, “you come on and see.” To be very
truthful, Toby had quite casually mentioned to Grover Beech at noon
that he was bringing another Second Team candidate out with him in the
afternoon, and Beech had nodded approvingly, but that Beech would be
disappointed was somewhat problematical.

“Well,” said Tubb, “I can’t go to-day. Maybe to-morrow――――”

Toby stepped forward and to Tubb’s vast surprise pulled the latter
swiftly to his feet. “Where’s that sweater?” he demanded. Tubb blinked,
his mouth open for words that didn’t come. “Which is your closet?”
continued Toby quickly. Tubb’s eyes shifted to the left and Toby pulled
open a door, fumbled through the few garments hanging beyond it and
pulled out a faded brown coat-sweater. “This isn’t the kind you want,
but it’ll have to do,” he said briskly. He tossed it over his arm and
threw back the door into the corridor. “All right! Beat it!”

Tubb’s face expressed a queer mingling of resentment and relief. But
even yet he managed to find objections. “Oh, what’s the good?” he
growled. “I don’t want to play football, anyway. I don’t want――――”

What he didn’t want was quickly changed to what he did want, for he
found himself suddenly outside in the corridor, the door closed behind
him and Toby’s firm, impelling clutch on his neck. “Wait! I want my
hat!” he begged.

“You don’t need a hat,” was the inexorable answer. “Go on! I tell you
it’s getting late, and we’ve got to change yet. Hustle, G. W. Tubb!”

Somewhat to Toby’s surprise, Tubb hustled. He tried to make a pretense
of hanging back, but he nevertheless covered the ground between
dormitory and gymnasium in very good time. The locker-room in the
basement was fairly packed with First and Second Team candidates, and
Toby was aware of an occasional curious glance, but for the most part
the occupants of the room were too busy to pay attention to him or his
charge. He found the old football trousers, borrowed a pair of shoes
from one neighbor and stockings from a second, and presently Tubb,
presenting a rather dilapidated appearance, was attired for business.
He nevertheless looked, Toby thought, a bit more presentable in the
battle-scarred togs than in the shapeless and wrinkled clothes he had
removed. During the operation of dressing Tubb grumbled and sneered
continuously, but he was no longer fooling Toby. It was plain to be
seen that Tubb was really quite as anxious to get to the field as Toby
was to have him!

Several other newcomers reported that afternoon, and so Tubb was not
alone as a tyro. Toby haled him at once to Sam Wansworth, the manager,
and Tubb replied grumpily to the few stereotyped questions asked. Then
practice was started and the two parted, Toby joining his usual squad
and Tubb the bunch of latest recruits. It was an afternoon of good
football weather, bright and crisp, with a straight breeze blowing down
the field from the marshes across the glistening river. Beyond, on the
First Team gridiron, a half-dozen punters and drop-kickers were busy
in front of the north goal, and the pigskins arose and fell against
the blue distance. Just above the boathouse the single occupant of a
bright yellow canoe was struggling gamely against wind and tide, the
sunlight flashing on the dripping paddle.

Twenty minutes of passing and starting, and then Toby’s squad was
trotted over to the tackling dummies and he had his first clutch at the
moving, swaying canvas effigy. That his first clutch wasn’t a firm one
is easily understood by those who have been through his experience.
“Gyp” Harris was in charge, and Gyp wasn’t one to be easily satisfied.
Working the rope that sent the dummy rattling along the cable between
the posts with one hand, he used the other to point and gesticulate.
Toby thought he had never seen any one more eloquent with one hand than
the trainer! Not, however, that Gyp was dumb, or even tongue-tied. On
the contrary, he had a strong voice and an effective vocabulary, and he
kept both busy in a sort of sing-song fashion.

“Next man! Feet together! Let ’er go! Off on the left! Get him! Hold
him! Pull him down! Rotten, perfectly rotten! You tackled too high
again! Next man!...”

Occasionally there was pause while Gyp left the pulley and strode over
to the head of the line and gave an illustration or criticized with
ample detail some glaringly unfortunate attempt. “What have I told
you about getting your body in front of the dummy, Bowen? Can’t you
understand that when you tackle a runner from behind he’s going to drag
you a way before you can stop him? Get in front of him so that your
body blocks him. A man can’t push with his legs below the knees when
he’s on his feet. Of course, you’re supposed to get to him hard enough
to put him off his feet. But if he has slowed up to meet you your game
is to lift him and throw him back toward his own goal. You can’t do
that if you’re behind him because he will throw his weight forward. Get
your body in front, lock his knees and lift. And don’t land on your
stomach when you dive, Bowen. Land on your hip. See if you can’t get it
right the next time.”

Toby came to the conclusion that he was more than ordinarily stupid,
but it is probable that he did as well as any of the others that first
day. Presently they were dismissed, though not with the trainer’s
blessing, and another squad took their place. Coach Burtis and Captain
Beech had formed a tentative team of the more experienced or more
likely candidates, and these were trotting around the field in signal
work with Frick at quarter-back. Toby and three other fellows were sent
across to the further side of the gridiron to catch punts, or, failing
the catch, to recover them as best they could. At that game Toby found
himself rather clever. He seemed able to judge the wobbling, descending
balls with more certainty than his companions and to hold them better
when they reached him. Having got a ball, he trotted back part way
across and threw it the rest of the distance. He would have liked to
punt it, but this was forbidden.

Still later, he was set to taking snap-backs and passes from Watson,
one of the candidates for center. He gathered that Watson had
shown himself deficient in that branch of his play. It wasn’t very
interesting work, for Watson was earnest and determined and erratic,
and Toby spent half of his time chasing around after the pigskin. Once,
taking passes from a distance of five yards and at an angle, or trying
to, he became aware that some one was looking on and turned to discover
Coach Burtis behind him. The coach nodded encouragingly. “Not bad,
Tucker. Try to be a little more shifty on your feet, though. Keep on
your toes, ready to go in any direction. In play it’s rather disastrous
to let the ball get past you, you know.”

He went on, leaving Toby surprised and gratified that he had remembered
his name.

There was no scrimmage to-day, and practice ended with a two-lap trot
around the gridiron and then up to the gymnasium, where most of them
arrived very much out of breath. During practice Toby had caught an
occasional glimpse of Tubb looking harassed and mutinous, but it wasn’t
until they met in the locker-room that Toby had an opportunity to speak
to him. Tubb sank onto the bench with a grunt of weariness and disgust
and savagely attacked the laces of his borrowed shoes. Toby, hiding a
grin, asked pleasantly:

“Well, how did it go, Tubb?”

“Rotten! There’s no sense to that sort of stuff. I thought I was going
to play football, not bean-bag!”

“It is rather tiresome at first,” said Toby, “but you’ll soon be
through with that. To-morrow――――”

“Yes, I’m through with it right now,” growled Tubb. “I’ve had all I
want, thanks, Tucker.”

“Oh, piffle, Tubb! You’re not going to quit like that!”

“Ain’t I? You watch me!” replied the other grimly.

“Better give it a fair trial. After all, there’s a certain amount of
drudgery to be gone through with, no matter what you take up. Learning
to handle the ball is quite necessary, Tubb.”

“A whole afternoon of it isn’t necessary, I guess. Anyway, I’m
through.” Tubb kicked the shoes aside scowlingly. “I knew how it would
be. A few fellows get all the pickings and the others play the goat.
All you’ll get out of it, Tucker, is a lot of hard work, and then
they’ll give you the bounce.”

“What of it if I have a good time before they do?” asked Toby
cheerfully.

“A good time!” sneered the other.

“Sure. Come on and have a shower and you’ll feel better, Tubb.”

“I don’t want any shower,” muttered Tubb.

“Well, I do. As a favor to me, I wish you’d keep on for the rest of
this week, Tubb.” Toby spoke earnestly and smiled. Tubb caught the
smile. After a moment he growled hesitantly:

“Oh, well――I’ll see.”

“Thanks. That’s a promise!”

“’Tain’t either! I didn’t say――――”

But Toby was off and Tubb’s protest went unfinished.




CHAPTER IX

YARDLEY PLAYS GREENBURG


Two mornings later Toby again played tennis with Horace Ramsey. This
time Horace captured the first set, mainly on his serve, and made Toby
work hard to keep ahead in the second. Horace had followed Toby’s
advice and had sought and found an opponent the day before, and he was
fast reviving his enthusiasm for the game. Although it was perhaps only
imagination, Toby thought that the younger boy already showed evidences
of benefit from the exercise. To-day he made Horace promise to have Mr.
Bendix, the physical director, give him a thorough examination, and on
Saturday Horace reported the result of it.

“I suppose he knows,” said Horace dubiously, “but it’s funny he didn’t
say anything about my heart until I asked him.”

“What did he say then?” inquired Toby.

“Well, he said there was nothing the matter with it.” Horace was
evidently thoroughly puzzled. “He said it was just as good as his.
Maybe he didn’t want to frighten me, though. Do you think that’s it,
Tucker?”

“No, I don’t,” replied Toby bluntly. “I think he told the truth. If
there ever was anything wrong with your heart you’ve outgrown it,
Ramsey. Don’t worry about his trying to let you down easy. He wouldn’t.
I know that he’s mighty careful about weak hearts. He’s kept lots of
fellows out of track work and baseball just because of that trouble.
No, sir, Ramsey, if ‘Muscles’ says your heart is all right, you may
depend upon it that it is all right. How about your weight? Dropped any
yet?”

Horace’s brow cleared magically. “Haven’t I?” he exclaimed. “Two and a
quarter pounds since I weighed Tuesday! How’s that?”

“Fine――for a start,” answered Toby. “Keep it up. You’ve only begun!”

Meanwhile, Tubb had kept on at football, although under constant
protest. He had bought himself togs, and very good ones they were; a
fact which led Toby to hope and believe that, in spite of his growls,
Tubb really meant to keep on. Whenever they met, however, Tubb wearied
Toby sadly with his grouches. He insisted on holding Toby responsible
for every bruise and every tired muscle. While he didn’t say it in
so many words, he made Toby understand that he had remained in the
Second Team squad merely to oblige the other. A martyr is bad enough
to have to listen to, but when the martyr has a grouch he is even more
irritating. There were times when Toby would have given much for the
privilege of kicking Tubb. But he didn’t. He didn’t even tell him to
dry up and blow away. He kept his temper and listened to the boy’s
growls without a murmur. Naturally, he didn’t seek Tubb’s society. In
fact, whenever he could do so without having it seem too apparent, he
avoided the pale-faced youth as he would have avoided any other pest.

By that Saturday, however, the word pale-faced no longer applied to
Tubb as it had a week before. Four very warm days such as frequently
visit Connecticut around the first of October had brushed Tubb’s
cheeks with red and set his nose to peeling. Perhaps the change hadn’t
benefited the lad’s appearance much, but Toby noted it hopefully. Toby
himself had added another shade of brown to a complexion already well
sunburned by a summer spent largely on the water, and his blue eyes
looked lighter than ever in comparison with the surrounding territory
of mahogany hue.

Something quite unlooked for and, to Toby, extremely disconcerting had
happened the middle of that week. On Wednesday there had been a summons
to quarter-back candidates to the lower end of the field for punting
practice. Toby had remained serenely unaffected on the bench, whither
he had retired after a strenuous bout with the tackling dummy, until he
had been awakened by the challenge of Coach Burtis.

“Where are you, Tucker? Didn’t you hear the call?” Mr. Burtis was a
trifle incisive as to voice, for prompt obedience was something he
insisted on. Toby, alarmed, jumped to his feet and looked wildly about
him.

“N-no, sir! What――where――――”

“Well, hurry up.” The coach waved a hand toward the north goal.
“Quarter-backs down there for punting.”

Toby stared, opened his mouth, closed it, stood irresolute until Mr.
Burtis asked sharply: “Well, what’s wrong? You’re trying for quarter,
aren’t you?”

“N-n――――” Toby gulped hard. “Yes, sir!”

“Well, get busy then! Want me to lead you by the hand?”

Toby found his feet and hurried away, pursued by the laughter of the
others along the bench.

“So I’m a quarter-back, am I?” he asked himself bewilderedly as he ran.
“Gee, that’s a new one on me! Well, it’s fine to know what you are,
even if you know you aren’t! I guess he will change his mind after he’s
seen me try it!”

There were four other fellows there when he reached the scene: Frick,
Stair, Rawson, and Bird. Stillwell was coaching. Toby knew very
little about punting as a science, although he could kick a football
for varying distances from five yards to thirty――if he didn’t miss
it altogether! There was very little actual punting that day, for
Stillwell had a lot to say on the theory of it, and for the most part
the pupils practiced holding the ball and dropping it, standing and
stepping forward and swinging the leg. At the end Stillwell let them
try a few punts, and Toby, for his part, hoped that Coach Burtis wasn’t
watching! That evening he had a brand-new lot of aches situate in the
right hip and down the right leg. “Stillwell,” he confided ruefully
to Arnold, “thought he was coaching a bunch of ballet dancers. He was
never happy unless we were standing on the left foot and pointing the
right toe straight at the zenith, whatever the zenith is! I don’t feel
happy on both feet, Arn. Mind if I tuck one over the transom?”

“You’re mighty lucky to get a chance at quarter,” answered his chum
severely. “Don’t you know that?”

“Oh, yes,” said Toby, “I’m painfully aware of it!”

By Saturday he had forgotten his aches and the lameness was gone and
he could toe the pigskin in a fairly creditable manner and for decent
distances, so long as direction was not important. But when he was told
to place a punt near the right side line about thirty yards distant,
either he sent it toward the left side line or down the middle of the
field. Or if by any possible chance he got the direction right, then
the ball went fifteen yards instead of thirty. There was, he allowed,
a lot more to punting than he had suspected. Of course, life wasn’t
all swinging a scuffed shoe against a stained and battered football
those days. There was signal work, too. And some experimenting in
forward passing. And other things. And Toby frequently regretted the
fact that he had not dared to tell Coach Burtis the truth when he had
been accused of quarter-back aspirations. Still, when things weren’t
at their worst, he enjoyed it. No one took him seriously as a quarter,
not even Grover Beech; and when scrimmaging began Frick and Rawson and
Stair had the call over him. Only once that week had Toby worked at
quarter, and then for only a matter of five minutes or so on B Squad.
For many days he disliked to recall the event, for he had dared a
quarter-back run and Farquhar, an opposing tackle, had chased him back
and back until, in sheer fear of being forced over his own goal line,
he had toppled to earth, snuggling the ball, a good fifteen yards back
of where he had started from! It was a very sheepish Toby who scrambled
to his feet again, for there was a ripple of laughter from the bench
and many amused faces about him. For the few remaining moments of play
he was too wretched to be of much use. Fortunately for him, perhaps,
A Squad had the ball and Toby was able to retire up-field and nurse
his wounded feelings in solitude. Afterwards he reached the pleasing
conclusion that he was not necessarily dishonored for life, but it was
some time before he cared to recall the incident.

On Saturday practice was over early in order that the Second might
profit by watching the First Team play Greenburg High School. High
School wasn’t a formidable opponent even for a first game of the
season. Yardley had started her schedule with High School for many
years, generally winning by a comfortable margin of points. The contest
served to try out a large number of players, and it was usually on the
Monday following the Greenburg game that the first cut in the squad
was made. In consequence to-day’s battle meant a good deal to some
candidates who felt their positions to be none too secure, and there
were many anxious faces amongst the substitutes who graced the bench
after the game had started.

Toby and the rest of the Second Team fellows didn’t reach the scene
until the second period had begun. Then they perched themselves,
still wrapped in their blankets like so many Indians, in the nearer
corner of the old stand and proceeded to be extremely critical. Sid
Creel squeezed into a place beside Toby with a huge sigh of enjoyment.
“Nothing to do but watch a lot of poor boobs work themselves deaf,
dumb, and blind,” he said with relish. “Who’s at center for them, Toby?”

“Simpson.”

“Well, he’s the best they’ve got, to my thinking. He’s light, though.”

“Oh, well, his weight’s where it ought to be, Sid.”

“Meaning?”

“He’s got brains. So many centers haven’t, you know.”

“Huh? ’S at so? Well, let me inform you――Oh, good work, Phil! How’s
that for a neat little canter, Toby? More than twenty yards! What’s
eating that referee? Oh, my word! Offside――no, holding! I didn’t see
any holding, did you? That referee’s crazy!”

“No, I didn’t see any holding unless you call it holding to nearly pull
a fellow’s arm off him!”

“Who did that?”

“Ted Halliday.”

“Idiot! Look what it’s cost them! Say, is Deering playing?”

“No, that’s Bates at right half. And Roover at left. Arn will get in,
of course. Maybe he’s been in. Mr. Lyle will use about every fellow
he’s got to-day, I suppose.”

“Yes, he’ll use a lot to-day and lose a lot to-morrow or Monday. Look
at that line of victims over there. A good third of them will be
missing next week.”

“Yes, and some of them will be playing on the Second, Sid. I wouldn’t
wonder if we got a good center pretty soon.”

“Soon! we’ve got one right now. I don’t want to seem boastful,
but――Gee, what a rotten punt! Who was that? Snowden, eh? Well, Larry
wants to do better than that or he will lose his job! Gee, I could kick
a ball farther than that myself!”

Followed a Greenburg fumble, a quick recovery for a loss and a weird
attempt at an end run almost under High School’s goal. Then a kick
on second down and the ball floated into the waiting arms of Will
Curran, the Yardley quarter, just past the center of the field. Curran
was still the old Curran, it seemed, for he was off like a shot,
side-stepped an adversary, broke through the nearer field of mingled
friend and foe, and was off on a long, straight dash for the Greenburg
goal. Toby and Sid cheered prodigiously as Curran fooled the anxious
quarter and romped over the last white line between the posts. Snowden
missed the goal and the figures on the score-board stood 11 to 0. The
half ended a moment later and the big squad of blue-legged players
trailed off to the gymnasium. Sid ambled off to find some fellow who
had borrowed a dollar from him last spring, his round face set in
determined lines, and a moment later George Tubb took the vacant place
at Toby’s side.

“Pretty punk game, isn’t it?” he said.

Toby concealed his displeasure as best he could. “Well, it’s the first
one, you know. Can’t expect much of a first game. How did you get on
to-day?”

“Pretty good.” Toby was actually startled. Never before had he heard
Tubb approach so close to enthusiasm! Even the rest of his response
couldn’t altogether spoil the first part. “I’m through to-day, though.
I only agreed to keep on for the week, you know. Well, here’s your fat
friend coming back, and I’ll beat it. So long, Tucker.”

“So long,” answered Toby. To himself he added viciously, “I’d like to
punch your silly head!”




CHAPTER X

TOBY EMPTIES HIS LOCKER


“The cheek of him!” exclaimed Sid, seating himself. “What do you think
he asked me to do?”

“Go away?” hazarded Toby.

“Asked me to lend him another half! Said he’d pay it all back next
Wednesday, when he gets his allowance. What do you know about that?
That fellow’s got the makings of a financier!”

“Or a grafter,” laughed Toby. Sid shook his head.

“No, his method is too high-class. He will be a J. Pierpont Rockefeller
at thirty. Well, anyway, I told him what I thought of him.”

“Then you didn’t get your dollar, eh? Look here, if you’re hard-up,
Sid, I can lend you――――”

“No, thanks. I’m all right. I don’t need that dollar just now, but
he’s been owing it since three days before the end of last term, and
I thought it was time he paid it. That was all. Maybe he will on
Wednesday. If he doesn’t I’ll land on his neck! Not that I care so much
about the dollar and a half, but it’s the principle of the――――”

“Dollar, you mean, don’t you?”

“Dollar? Dollar and a half. He owed me a dollar before.”

“Do you mean that you lent him the half?” exclaimed Toby incredulously.
Sid looked surprised.

“I told you, didn’t I? That’s what I was kicking about.”

“But――but you didn’t have to lend him any more, did you?”

“Have to? N-no, I didn’t _have_ to, but what are you going to do when
a fellow comes at you like that? Oh, he will come across some day. I’m
not worrying.”

Toby laughed. “You’re easy, Sid,” he said. “I suppose next Wednesday he
will borrow another fifty cents from you! If fellows were all like you
I could be a Rockefeller myself! Here they come!”

Yardley managed to chalk up twelve more points in the last two periods
and to keep Greenburg High from scoring. Greenburg weakened badly
toward the last, although, like her opponent, she made constant
changes in her line-up. During the final period there were moments
when the stream of incoming substitutes from the Yardley bench was
almost unbroken. Mr. Lyle used three full elevens that afternoon, and
then threw in a couple more players just for good measure. There were
occasional flashes of brilliancy on the part of the Blue, but for
the most part the contest was uninteresting and the playing ragged.
Greenburg certainly deserved to lose, but it is doubtful if Yardley
deserved to win. However, no one expected much from the team in that
game, and no one was very critical.

That evening, alone for awhile in Number 12, Arnold had gone to a
lecture in Assembly Hall,――Toby forced himself to face a decision
regarding football. Earlier in the week he had promised himself to
quit to-day, but now he discovered that he didn’t want to quit. This
quarter-back business was mighty interesting, he acknowledged. Not that
he supposed for a minute that he would make good on the job: he would
never get so that he could rival Frick; never, perhaps, equal Rawson;
but a fellow needed some sort of exercise and football provided it. It
was really his duty to keep himself in training for hockey.

On the other hand, Latin was proving quite as difficult as he had
predicted, and one or two other courses promised to claim lots of his
time. If he really meant to win a scholarship next term he couldn’t
afford too many distractions. It was easy enough to say that football
work need not interfere with studies, but football work had a way of
doing that very thing. It wasn’t so much the time spent in actual
practice or play that counted as it was the time a fellow gave to
thinking about football. The sport had a way of seizing a fellow’s
interest to the exclusion of all else. And toward the end of the
season, as the Big Game loomed near, it was just about as easy for a
football player to give serious attention to his studies as it was for
a boy with a new red sled to display enthusiasm for the woodpile! Toby
had learned this solely from observation, but he knew it was so.

Toby’s father was a boat-builder, and while the past season had seen
a remarkable revival of the business, yet there were four of them in
the family, and while business had increased so had living costs. It
behooved Toby to get through the year as economically as possible,
and a scholarship award of perhaps eighty dollars would make a big
difference. He must do his level best to secure that. That decided,
had he the right to give the necessary time to football? Especially
as, after the Christmas recess, hockey would claim him. If it came to
choosing between the two, he would choose hockey. Hockey was Toby’s
game. He had proved himself in that. In football he might never become
more than a second-rate player, or even a third. If he resolutely gave
up football this minute and worked hard at his studies until Christmas,
he wouldn’t have to worry about the time he gave to hockey. Hockey
didn’t make the demands that football did, anyway. Well, then――――

Toby frowned and thought, and made up his mind and unmade it several
times, during the succeeding hour. Then Arnold came bustling in and
what his final decision was Toby never knew. But when he awoke Sunday
morning he discovered that his mind had attended to the matter by
itself while he slept, and in the afternoon, returning from a walk with
Arnold and Frank along the river, he excused himself and ran into the
gymnasium and down to the locker-room. When he overtook his companions
he carried an armful of football togs.

“What――what――――” exclaimed Arnold.

“I’ve decided not to play football, after all,” explained Toby calmly,
“so I thought I might as well clear out my locker to-day. There aren’t
enough of them to go around, you know.”

“Oh, you make me tired!” wailed Arnold. “I thought that was all
settled.”

“It is, now,” responded Toby cheerfully.

“But why?” demanded Arnold impatiently.

Toby explained, but Arnold refused to be satisfied. Somewhat to Toby’s
relief, Frank interrupted soothingly. “Let him alone, Arn. I guess
he’s right about it. It isn’t as if――well, what I mean is, he’s not
absolutely necessary, you know. It isn’t as if he was on the First
Team. The Second’s got plenty of material, and Toby’s not fooling
himself into thinking he’s a wonderful player. They’ll worry along
without him. No use spoiling a good hockey man to make a――a――――”

“Punk football man,” supplied Toby pleasantly. “You aren’t flattering,
Frank, but I guess you’re right.”

“No, he isn’t, he’s dead wrong,” said Arnold vehemently. “You could be
a rattling good football player, Toby, a corking one! I know it! And
now you’re queering everything. You make me sick. If you don’t dump
those things back in that locker the first thing to-morrow morning
I’ll――I’ll never forgive you, Toby!”

“Oh, yes, you will,” said Toby. “You’re quite wrong about me as a
football player, Arn. I’m pretty sure of that. Anyway, as Frank says,
they don’t need me, and I do need that scholarship.”

“I hope you choke on it,” growled Arnold disgustedly, and relapsed into
aggrieved silence.

But in spite of the certainty that he had decided wisely and rightly,
Toby felt a trifle dissatisfied the next afternoon, and somewhat at
a loose end. He determined to devote the first hour and a half after
his final recitation to hard study, telling himself that he would
have the room to himself and that Whitson would be delightfully quiet
and conducive to work. Afterwards he would walk over and watch First
Team practice for awhile. But, although he found the quietude and
solitude he expected, it wasn’t so easy to put his mind on his books.
The sunlit world outside called loudly, he couldn’t get comfortable
in the chair and, in spite of good intentions, his mind insisted on
wandering toward the gridiron. But he stuck it out to the prescribed
moment and then fairly ran downstairs and into the late afternoon
sunshine, uncomfortably conscious that he had spent an hour and a half
to no purpose. Still, to-morrow he would do better, he promised. By
the time he had seated himself in the grandstand, watching the First
Team in a spirited practice game, he had recovered his spirits. On
the further gridiron the Second was hard at it, but Toby decided to
stay away from that quarter to-day. Grover Beech might say unpleasant
things about “quitters,” and while Toby’s conscience was quite clear,
he realized that the Second Team captain would have his own point of
view. But although he managed to evade Beech for the time, a meeting
was inevitable, and it occurred after supper that evening. They both
left their tables at the same moment and came together at the door.
Beech looked a trifle huffy.

“What’s the stupendous idea, Tucker?” he demanded. “You know we
practice on Mondays just like any other day.”

“Why, I――Didn’t Gyp tell you?”

“Gyp? Yes, he said something about your not reporting to-day, but that
didn’t mean anything to me. What’s the scheme, old man?”

Toby explained, not very eloquently because Beech’s expression became
momentarily more and more disapproving. Once or twice the captain
uttered a dry “Huh!” or gestured impatience, but he heard Toby through.
Then, however, he broke out with force and emphasis. Toby, backed up
against the long hatrack, was aware of the curious looks bent on him by
those who passed, and even read sympathy in some glances. Doubtless
Beech’s attitude looked rather threatening!

“You poor fish!” said the captain pityingly. “Hasn’t any one ever
told you about duty? What do you think you are, anyway? A――a real,
sure-enough Person? You’re not, Tucker my lad, you’re just a simple
little cog in the Wheel of Progress. You’re not at all important as an
individual. You’re merely an entity. Now――――”

“Hold on! I’m not sure I ought to let you call me that!”

“Shut up! I’ll call you worse in a minute, maybe a microbe or a
protoplasm. Look here, Tucker, joking aside, you can’t do this, you
know. Every fellow has a duty to the School――――”

“I know, and every fellow has a duty to himself, Beech. I need that
scholarship――――”

“Get it! I’m not objecting, my son! But don’t throw the team down to
do it. Shucks, you can play football for a month or six weeks longer
without losing the scholarship! Come on, Tucker, don’t be a worm!”

“But――but what difference does it make?” pleaded Toby. “I’m no football
wonder. You’ve got half a dozen fellows to fill in for me. It isn’t
like I was any account, Beech!”

“What are you doing? Fishing for compliments? Come on and quit your
kidding! Do you suppose Burtis would have put you with the quarters if
he hadn’t seen that you had the stuff in you?”

“But I haven’t! I can’t play quarter-back for a cent, Beech, honest!
Besides, there’s Frick and Rawson and Stair――――”

“Listen, Tucker, I know who we’ve got just as well as you do. Those
fellows are all right, but not one of them has any better chance of
copping the job than you have. And we want the best fellow to get it.
So you come on back to-morrow, Tucker my lad, and be properly ashamed
of yourself. And don’t let’s have any more talk about scholarships and
things. If you can’t play a little football and keep your end up in
classes you’re less of a man than I thought you were. And that’s that!”

“Well, I’ll see,” answered Toby dubiously. “It’s all well enough――――”

“You’ll see nothing,” said Beech sternly. “You’ll be on the field
to-morrow at three-fifteen dressed to play. By the way, where’d you get
hold of that chap Tubbs?”

“Why, I just happened to run across him. He was having sort of a poor
time of it and I thought if I could get him interested in something he
might pull himself together.” Toby was rather apologetic. “He didn’t
want to do it and I was afraid he wouldn’t stick it long.”

“How do you mean, wouldn’t stick it?”

“Why, he’s quit, hasn’t he? He told me Saturday he was going to.”

“He was out to-day all right. Shucks, he isn’t going to quit. He’s
stringing you. He’s liking it well enough now, and unless I miss my
guess he’s going to make a few of our bunch sit up and take notice. The
boy’s a natural-born end! Well, see you to-morrow, old man. So long!”

George Tubb a “natural-born end”! Toby forgot for the moment the
complication just introduced into his own affairs in surprise over
Beech’s appraisal of Tubb. That the latter would make good on the
gridiron Toby had never for an instant believed. He had only hoped that
the dissatisfied youth would find in football a new and sufficient
interest to reconcile him to the school and, perhaps, a means of making
friends. Well, he was certainly quite as pleased as he was surprised!
In view of what Beech had just told him, however, he wondered why
Tubb had threatened only two days ago to quit; and, still wondering,
he kept on to the third floor instead of stopping at the second and
knocked at the door of Number 31.




CHAPTER XI

TOM FANNING, OPTIMIST


Only Horace Ramsey was at home when Toby entered Number 31. Ramsey
appeared very glad to see the visitor, and he was quite fussed-up
during the process of getting Toby comfortably seated. The room was
one of the better ones on the third floor, and one of the occupants,
probably Ramsey, had added to the scanty equipment supplied by the
school. Although the evening had turned decidedly cool, both windows
were wide open, and it was not until Toby had glanced at them a bit
uneasily several times that Ramsey took the hint.

“It is sort of cold in here, I guess,” he said, as he closed the
windows. “I’m used to a cold room, though. Plenty of fresh air is what
I like. Mr. Bendix says you can’t have too much of it. George doesn’t
like it much, though, and we scrap a good deal about having the windows
open.”

“George? Oh, you mean Tubb. How are you and he getting on now? Hitting
it off any better?”

Horace Ramsey smiled. “Oh, yes, we get on all right. He’s a cranky
chap, though. I have to handle him carefully. He gets the most awful
grouches you ever saw. Gets positively ugly and hates himself. Still,
he’s been some better the last few days.” Ramsey chuckled. “Guess I
have, too. At first I used to let go of my temper and――well, you found
us at it one night. Remember? Now I just let him growl and he gets over
it after a bit. He’s really not a bad sort when you get to know him.”

“I thought I might find him in,” explained Toby. Then a faint
expression of disappointment on the other’s face made him add: “And
then I wanted to see how you were getting on, too, Ramsey. You’re
looking pretty fit. Been playing much tennis?”

“Every day. A fellow named Lingard, a Fourth Class fellow, and I have
been at it a lot. Don’t know if you know him, Tucker. Sort of a lanky
chap, with――――”

“Yes, I know Tommy. Didn’t know he was a tennis player, though.”

“He isn’t,” laughed Ramsey. “At least, not much of one. But neither
am I just now, and I sort of like to play with a chap I can lick now
and then. Maybe it isn’t good practice, though. There’s a fellow
named Colcord who gave me a couple of sets this afternoon. He’s pretty
good at it. Beat me both sets, 6 to 3. I’d like to take you on again,
Tucker. I guess I could give you a better fight now that I’ve had some
practice. Mr. Bendix says it’ll take several weeks to get my muscles
loosened up.”

“I dare say. Had much trouble with your heart lately?”

“N-no, very little. I get out of breath pretty easily, but Mr. Bendix
says that’s because I’m carrying too much weight. Maybe my heart’s all
right after all, just as he says it is. He sort of――what I mean is, you
can’t help believing what he says, can you? He’s supposed to know a
lot about physical training and――and all that, isn’t he?” Toby nodded
assent. “I like him a lot, anyway, and I’m doing just what he tells me,
even to nearly freezing in here with the windows open.”

Toby laughed. “Thought you said you were used to cold rooms, Ramsey!”

“Well, I――I meant I was getting used to them,” answered the other,
grinning.

“Tubb is still with the Second Team, I hear,” said Toby.

“Yes. That reminds me! He was quite excited this afternoon because you
weren’t on the field. Don’t know what business it is of his, but he
kept chewing the rag about it.”

“No, I――I cut practice to-day. Fact is, I――――” Then he stopped. He had
been about to add that he was through with football for the season, but
he suddenly realized that it wasn’t true, that to-morrow would find him
back again. “How’s Tubb getting on?” he asked instead.

“Oh, pretty well, I guess. He hasn’t said so, but when he doesn’t growl
about a thing I know it’s all right. Last week he kept telling how hard
they made him work and saying he was going to quit, but he’s shut up
about it lately.”

A few minutes afterward, going down to the floor below, Toby shook
his head dubiously. “It’s funny the way I make up my mind to things
lately without knowing it. When I went upstairs I thought I was going
to be firm with Beech and stay out of it. Then, first thing I knew, I’d
decided to keep on! Wonder if there’s something wrong with my bean!”

Back in Number 12, Toby found a scrawl from Arnold bidding him follow
to Frank’s room in Clarke, but he crumpled it up and, after a moment’s
reflection, dropped it in the waste-basket and settled himself at
the table. He got in some good licks of study that evening and was
annoyingly superior and virtuous when Arnold returned at bedtime.

The next afternoon Toby took his togs back to the gymnasium.
Fortunately, although he had given up his locker, no one had secured
it. If Coach Burtis knew of his defection the day before he made no
sign. Grover Beech, however, nodded commendingly, and, or so Toby
thought, Roy Frick, at present the most promising of the quarter-backs,
viewed his return with a noticeable lack of cordiality. For several
afternoons Toby toiled and drudged willingly and contentedly. Mr.
Burtis was allowing but three scrimmages a week, and in none of them
did Toby appear. The fact puzzled the boy considerably, but he kept
his puzzlement to himself. Even Bird, who could not be considered
first-class quarter-back material by any stretch of imagination, got
in for a few minutes in each practice game. Toby invariably retired
to the bench when the line-up came and, blanket-swathed, watched and
wondered throughout the ten or fifteen minute periods. On one such
occasion he found a seat beside George Tubb. He and George had met
and spoken before, but only briefly. To-day Toby viewed George with
real surprise. Seen at close quarters, the younger fellow showed the
results of a week of football work very plainly. He had a much better
color, looked several pounds thinner――and considerably harder――and had
lost some of the discontent usually so eloquently expressed by his
countenance. But there was plenty of the old George W. Tubb left, as
Toby soon discovered.

“They’ve got me playing end,” said George. “It’s a rotten position. I
told that big guy with the swelled head that I wanted――――”

“Meaning the coach?” asked Toby.

“Sure! I told him I was a half-back, but he thinks he knows it all.”

“Too bad,” commented Toby innocently, “because, of course, a fellow
can’t do good work out of his right position. I suppose you’re making
rather a mess of end, Tubb.”

“Who says that?” demanded George, with a scowl.

“Why, no one. I just thought, from what you said――――”

“Well, I guess I’m doing as well as Connell; and he’s been playing two
years at it. But this business doesn’t get a fellow anywhere. What’s it
amount to, anyway? They say we’ll play a couple of dozen games with
the First and run up against two or three bum teams around here, and
then it’s all over, and the First Team gets the glory. Maybe I’ll stick
it out awhile longer, but life’s too short to spend a month and a half
at this sort of stuff.”

He glanced sidewise at Toby as he finished, and Toby caught the glance
and understood. George had no intention of quitting, and never had had
since the first day! What he wanted was Toby to ask him not to! Toby
suppressed a smile.

“I wouldn’t do that, Tubb,” he said earnestly. “I――I wish you wouldn’t.
You see, I have a hunch that you’ve got in you to make a pretty good
player, and――well, I wish you’d give yourself a fair chance. As a favor
to me, Tubb, I wish you’d try to stick it out.”

George growled and scowled, but Toby didn’t miss the look of
satisfaction that flickered for an instant in his eyes. After a moment
of weighty hesitation George sighed wearily. “Well, I guess another
week or two won’t hurt me,” he said ungraciously. “I’ll stick around
until I get Connell’s number, anyway. You got me into this, Tucker,
and――――” George stopped abruptly, leaped to his feet and dropped his
blanket. “I’ve got to go in! See you later!”

Then he legged it to where Coach Burtis was beckoning, leaving Toby
grinning broadly. “He’s just the biggest kind of a kid,” thought Toby.
“Wants friendship and hasn’t the slightest idea how to get it!”

But if Toby was allowed no opportunity to achieve glory that week,
at least none begrudged him hard work. He was allowed to labor to
his heart’s content. Nay, he was urged to! Coach Burtis seemed to be
distinctly unhappy if Toby happened on a moment’s idleness during
practice time, and he or Captain Beech was forever at hand to suggest
a new activity. Toby got to hate the tackling dummy with a deep and
bitter hatred. He told Arnold he couldn’t enjoy his meals any longer
because his mouth was always filled with dirt. Arnold advised him to
close his mouth when he did his tackling.

For the First Team, on which Arnold was alternating with Bates at
right half-back, life had become real and earnest. Coach Lyle had made
a wholesale cut in the squad and fellows who were “up” in football
affairs professed themselves already able to tell you what the line-up
would be in the final game of the season with Broadwood. And a good
many did tell――if you’d listen. Frank Lamson was also trying for a
half-back position, but Frank’s chances were not considered brilliant.
At least, though, he survived the cut, and when, on Saturday, the team
played its second game, with Tyron School, Frank displaced Roover in
the last quarter and sent his stock up tremendously by a slashing
fourteen-yard run that netted Yardley’s last score. Toby saw the final
half of the game from the bleachers and yelled like a Comanche when
Frank fairly smashed his way through the Tyron backs and went over the
line near the corner of the field with two of the enemy clinging to
him like limpets. Yardley’s work showed the effect of a week’s hard
practice and some indication of promise. Teamwork was totally lacking,
however, and it was individual brilliancy that ran the score up to 29
points. Curran, at quarter-back, and Noyes, who substituted for him,
handled the team well. On the whole, although Tyron had managed to
secure 6 points by two easy field-goals, Yardley Hall was satisfied
with her team’s showing, and felt that there was reason to expect a
successful season. As, however, October was still but a few days old,
the conclusion may have been a trifle premature.

Captain Fanning, naturally optimistic, viewed the future very
cheerfully indeed that evening. He was a tall, fine-looking chap, was
Tom, and immensely popular. If he had any discernible fault it was
that popularity meant a little too much to him, that he was a bit too
dependent on the goodwill of his fellows. Criticism didn’t agree with
Tom. It didn’t make him angry, but it hurt his feelings. On the other
hand, praise was meat and drink to him, and if you wanted to hear him
purr you had only to stroke him. But every one liked him, the juniors
in Merle Hall, the First Class fellows in Dudley and the faculty
members as well. And he was a really remarkable football player, as
he had proved last season. His more ardent admirers went so far as to
believe that so long as Tom Fanning played left tackle it didn’t matter
much who else was on that side of center. Like most brilliant players,
though, he was better offensively than defensively. As a captain Tom
had yet to be proved, for neither personal popularity nor individual
ability necessarily insures leadership. Tom believed very thoroughly in
himself, however, and if any one held doubts as to his fitness for the
captaincy that person was not Tom.

To-night, tilted back in a chair against Toby’s bed, his long legs
stretched before him, his hands in his trousers pockets, and a
contented smile on his good-looking countenance, Tom was doing his own
stroking. “Really, Arnold,” he was saying, “we’ve got a ripping lot
of fellows this year, now haven’t we? Take the line from end to end,
you can’t beat it! I don’t care whether Candee or Orlie Simpson plays
center or whether Jim Rose or Twining plays left guard. Any way you
look at it it’s a corking line. That’s the beauty of having really good
substitutes. As for the back-field, why, with you and Larry and Roover
and Curran――or Noyes, for that matter――there won’t be a better one in
this corner of the world this fall!”

“Say, Tom, how do you get that way?” asked Arnold, who was struggling
into a clean collar. “The team’s all right, old dear, but we haven’t
won the Broadwood game quite yet. To listen to you a fellow would think
we’d just hung the ball in the Trophy Room!”

Tom laughed good-naturedly. “Well, I’ve picked out a place for it, Arn!
Oh, we’ll have our little setbacks and we’ll lose a game or two one way
or another, but that isn’t troubling me any. Why――――”

“All right, but don’t talk like that so the fellows can hear you,”
protested Arnold, more than half serious. “The worst thing that can
happen to a team is for it to get the happy, confident feeling.
Just as soon as it does it gets a silly grin on its face――or faces,
rather――and dies in its tracks. I’d like it better if you’d cultivate a
fine grouch, Tom.”

“Maybe I shall later, but you can’t make me grouchy to-night. I tell
you, Arn, we showed what we had to-day. Take the team as it played this
afternoon and teach it to work together and you’ve got a real machine,
son. And Broadwood’ll know it some day!”

“I know. We have got some good players, and that’s no dream, but just
at present it’s too much of an all-star aggregation to make a hit with
me. There’s a heap of work ahead of us, old dear, before we get to be a
real football team, and don’t you forget that for a little minute!”

“Oh, you’re a regular Calamity Jane,” jeered Tom. “Come on, or we’ll be
late. Where’s Tucker? Isn’t he coming?”

“Yes, he will be here in a minute, I guess. And Frank’s going, too.”

“Lamson?” Tom’s brow clouded for an instant. “Say, Arn, he made a nifty
touchdown to-day, didn’t he?”

“I thought so. But you needn’t cry about it.”

“I’m not. I was only wondering――You know, to my mind, Morris Roover’s
the right chap there, Arn. Now suppose Lamson keeps on as he did this
afternoon, eh?”

“Why, he will get the place, won’t he? You want the best man there,
don’t you?”

“Rather! But Roover’s tried pretty hard for it. I mean, I’d be sorry
if he lost out. He had hard luck last fall, you know. Got sick in the
middle of the season and didn’t even get his letter. I suppose he’s
hoping to make good this year.”

“What of it? He’s got another year after this. The trouble with you,
Tom, is that you can’t forget your friendships on the gridiron. It
won’t do, believe me. Friendship ceases at three-fifteen, or it ought
to, when you’re captain. If it wasn’t for Mr. Lyle you’d have Sim
Clarke playing end and Snow at guard and――and all the rest of your
cronies――including me――on the team, and it would be a bum outfit.
Friendship’s no good when it comes to picking a team, Tom.”

“Nonsense!” retorted the other. He didn’t seem displeased, though. “Of
course I’d like to have my friends on the team; any fellow would; but
they won’t get any favoritism from me.”

“Oh, no, none at all!” answered Arnold, buttoning his vest. “Look
here, old dear, if I ever suspect that you’re trying to put me across
because I’m a friend I’ll quit the team cold!”

“Oh, rot! You know perfectly well that you and Bates are the best we
have for the position, and as far as I’m concerned I don’t care which
of you gets it.”

“Stick to that and all will be well! What time have you got? I wonder
what’s happened to Frank and――――”

Toby’s appearance interrupted him and a minute later they were on their
way, picking up Frank Lamson outside. They were going to the movies in
Greenburg, the larger town across the river. There was a small moving
picture theater in Wissining, no more than half a mile from school,
that was well patronized by Yardley, but in Greenburg there were three
of them to choose from, and to-night the boys had secured leave for the
whole evening and so had plenty of time to make the longer journey.
Besides, at Greenburg you got two pictures and listened to real music
from an organ, while at the local house your entertainment was over in
an hour and the piano was very tin-panny. Tom Fanning ranged beside
Toby on the way down the hill and Arnold and Frank followed. Tom was
still full of football and optimism, and Toby heard a good deal about
the team’s wonderful prospects and didn’t have to do any of the
talking. By the time the bridge was reached, however, Tom had worked
off some of his enthusiasm and inquired about Toby’s fortunes.

“Arn says he finally persuaded you to try for the Second,” he said.
“Like it?”

“Yes, I like it very well,” answered Toby. “Only I can’t seem to take
it as seriously as most of the fellows. Ought I to, Fanning? What I
mean is, just how important is playing football on the Second Team? I
wanted to quit last week and Arnold had a fit and Grover Beech read the
riot act to me. I thought football, especially Second Team football,
was a lark, but I’m beginning to think that it’s not!”

“Well, I suppose we do take football rather too seriously,” replied Tom
leniently. “But, hang it, Tucker, if you’re going to do a thing why not
do it well? Why not put your whole heart into it? Of course, the Second
Team isn’t as important as the First, but it’s just as well for the
fellows who play on it to think it is. If they didn’t, they wouldn’t
work so hard and we wouldn’t turn out such a good Second Team. And,
after all, a good Second is important, because it gives us practice.”

“When do you begin playing us?” asked Toby.

“Next week. Tuesday, probably. What are you trying for?”

“Quarter. Sounds conceited, doesn’t it?”

“Not a bit! Why? A quarter-back isn’t any better than a guard or an
end, is he? It takes just as much ability to play one position well as
it does another.”

“Y-yes, I suppose so, but――it seems to me a fellow’s got to know a
whole lot in order to run the team right.”

“Oh, yes, he has. But it comes down to knowing a few plays and when
to call for them, and remembering your signals. After all, it’s the
captain that’s the general. Half the time a quarter doesn’t get much
chance to boss the thing. The coach maps the game out beforehand, the
captain holds the reins and the quarter-back does the yelling.” Tom
laughed. “Anyway, that’s pretty close to it, Tucker.”

“That doesn’t sound so bad,” Toby said in relieved tones. “I was sort
of scared, you see; thought I might have to run the whole business if
I happened to get put in some time. I’d make rather a mess of it if I
did, I guess!”

“Not you, Tucker. You’re rather the type to make good, I’d say. I hope
you get the place.”

“Thanks,” answered Toby, dubiously. “You mean kindly, no doubt, but I
guess I’d just as lief some one else got it. Frick has it now and I
dare say he will keep it. He will so far as I’m concerned!”

“You don’t seem to have a very high notion of your ability,” laughed
Tom. “Don’t be too humble, Tucker, or folks will begin to think the way
you talk. And, look here, there’ll be a chance for you on the First
next year, for both Curran and Noyes will be gone, and the rest of the
lot aren’t very promising. So just you keep going, Tucker.”

“Oh, I’ll keep going all right,” replied Toby sadly. “They won’t let me
do anything else. They’re always picking on me.”

“Who?”

“Mr. Burtis and Beech. They sit up together until daylight finding
stunts for me to do the next day!”

“Sounds to me,” said Tom thoughtfully, “as if you were better than you
make yourself out, old man. Or else you imagine things.”

“Let’s say the last guess is right,” laughed Toby.

They visited two theaters before they found one whose bill promised
the sort of entertainment they wanted, and found seats just before the
house darkened. During the announcement of coming attractions some one
tapped Toby on the shoulder and he looked around in the half-gloom and
saw Horace Ramsey seated behind him in company with George Tubb. Horace
was evidently pleased when Toby recognized him and spoke to him, but
George’s only response to Toby’s whispered greeting was a nod and a
scowl.

Going homeward, two hours later, the quartet grew to a round dozen
as other Yardley boys joined it, and Arnold observed that maybe it
was just as well there were plenty of them as the “town thugs,” as he
called them, had been getting “fresh” lately. “Casement and another
chap were coming back the other night and got into a fine old scrap
with a gang of the toughs,” he explained. “They had to beat it finally.
Loring got a beautiful black eye out of it. He says there were four of
them against him and the other chap. Hence the retreat.”

“That’s something new, isn’t it?” asked a boy on the other side of
Arnold. “We never used to have any trouble with the town fellows.”

“They’re chaps from the new mill they built last year, I believe.
Rather a tough lot, I guess. They’ll get all they want, though, if they
keep on. Wouldn’t be a bad thing for some of them to turn up now and
try to start something,” Arnold chuckled. “They won’t, though, when
they see the size of our party.” And, although their progress out of
Greenburg was anything but quiet, none disputed their way.




CHAPTER XII

FIRST TEAM VS. SECOND


The Second Team started its training table Monday. The First had done
so a week earlier. The tables, each accommodating eighteen persons,
occupied the two farther corners of the dining-hall. That of the First
Team was given a certain degree of privacy by two oak screens similar
to the one that stood before the door leading to the pantry, but the
Second Team consumed its meals in full view of the world. Joining
the training table, Toby discovered, added no luxuries to your menu.
Rather, it did quite otherwise, for pastry and puddings, save for one
or two very simple concoctions, were sternly barred. You got rather
more beef and lamb――too underdone to please Toby――and eggs were a drug
on the market. Potatoes were served sparingly and only in the baked
condition. On the whole, there was a notable monotony to the training
table fare, but as the fellows were generally extremely hungry that
didn’t trouble them greatly.

Toby’s presence at the Second Team board was somewhat of a surprise to
Toby, since, as there were places for only seventeen players,――Coach
Burtis sat at the head of the table,――it seemed to him that he was
displacing more deserving talent. Why he should be there and Stair and
Bird not there, was a conundrum, a conundrum that was partly answered
for him that Monday afternoon.

“You’re on B Team, Tucker,” announced Mr. Burtis when, at four o’clock,
the players were called back to the bench. “Show me what you’ve learned
the last week. You’ll have Lippman at half and I want you to use him
whenever you can. Play him hard. He will stand it. And don’t neglect
your kicking game just because your punters aren’t the best. The only
way for them to learn is to have it to do. Keep to simple plays; B Team
doesn’t know anything complicated; and speed it up all you know how.”

“Y-yes, sir,” agreed Toby. Then he shed his blanket and wondered
whether he had learned anything the last week, and if he had what it
was! However, it wouldn’t do to let either the coach or the players
guess the trepidation he felt, and so he pulled on his head-guard
quite snappily and limbered up his legs, as, he judged, was the
approved thing to do, and looked as smiling and care-free as possible.
Then the two teams trotted out, A with the ball, and Gyp blew a whistle
and his troubles had begun.

But, after all, the troubles weren’t so many, nor so formidable. He
made mistakes, and he shared in a perfectly ghastly fumble on A’s
twenty-six yards, and twice he got his signals so badly mixed that
the whole team howled at him. But, on the other hand, he put vim into
his fellows and followed the coach’s directions regarding Lippman and
the kicking game and the use of simple plays, and before the period
had ended he had the exquisite pleasure of watching the pigskin skin
the enemy’s cross-bar for a three-point tally. He could have wept
tears of joy on Crawford’s neck for that thirty-yard drop-kick, and A
Team’s sullen resentment was an added delight. But B had to pay for
her cheekiness. Already A had scored a touchdown, and now, bitterly
resentful, she set to work to wreak vengeance. And she did it finally,
for three long runs by Nelson and White took the ball back to B’s
thirty-five yards and White plugged along for another down through
a crumbling right side in spite of Toby’s shrill exhortations, and
Stover banged into Sid Creel, at center, and piled through to the
eighteen. Toby was very glad when time was called for Sid’s recovery,
for B was on the run and becoming more disorganized each moment. He
spent a precious two minutes ranging the line and “talking Dutch,” and
when Sid, looking vague and dizzy, shuffled into his position again
there was a perceptible stiffening of the defense. But it couldn’t
last against A’s battering-ram tactics, and presently it was crumbling
again. Short gains but steady, and B was on her last white line, and it
was second down and every one was shouting or grunting. Toby gritted
his teeth and danced about and hurled defiance across the bent backs
before him, all the time trying with the intensity of despair to
guess the play that was coming. He did guess, but he guessed wrong,
and Nelson shot unexpectedly outside right tackle, straight for the
center of the goal, and the only satisfaction Toby got was in sitting
on Nelson’s head after he had been pulled down by Crawford. Bowen
grinned miserably, and every B Team fellow was very, very careful not
so much as to look at him; for Bowen was right tackle and had been most
ingloriously eliminated. After that the horn squawked and the half was
over.

Toby and several others who had played through the whole twelve minutes
were dismissed to the showers, although all would have preferred
staying and watching the second half. Instead, they argued hotly
all the way up to the gymnasium――the two teams being very equally
represented――and still argued, though with diminished heat, while
the showers hissed. Toby was secretly rather well satisfied with his
performance that afternoon until, later, he learned that B Team, under
Roy Frick’s generalship, had actually scored a touchdown in the last
period of play!

On Tuesday, after a half-hour of light practice, the Second trotted
over to the First Team field and, before a large and interested
audience, was badly mauled and beaten. Frick and Rawson played quarter
through two twelve-minute halves, and Toby and Stair――Bird, it seemed,
had retired to private life――sat on the bench and watched and worried,
trying to believe that things would have gone no better for the Second
if they had taken part. Second used most of her substitutes in a vain
effort to stave off, not defeat, for that was inevitable, but dishonor,
and could make nothing of it. First Team piled up the scores with
a merciless and monotonous succession and the audience yawned and
drifted away.

“What’s that?” asked Lou Stair drearily. “Twenty-three?”

“Twenty-six,” answered Toby glumly.

“Gee-jiminy-gosh!” groaned Stair. “Say, what’s the matter with the
Second, anyway? What’s got into ’em, Tucker! Look at Smith, will you?
Why doesn’t he get down? Why doesn’t Frick get after him? He thinks
he’s a skyscraper! And there goes Dawson off-side again! Gee, our bunch
is playing like sand-lot kids! Well, he got away with it, and that’s
something!”

“What of it?” asked Toby dully. “We didn’t make enough to plant a row
of beans on! That’s third. White’ll have to punt.”

“Yeah, as much as ten yards!” jeered Stair. “What’d I tell you? Guess
he’s got a friend on the side-line, the way he kicked the ball there!
Well, here’s where First scores again!”

And presently First did that very thing, Toby’s gloom being slightly
relieved by the fact that it was Arnold who took the ball over by a
slashing run from the Second’s eighteen yards. Gloom enveloped the
whole blanketed line of watchers that second half, for they had been
doing a good deal of talking as to what was to happen to the First
Team when they tried conclusions. In fact, Second had even gone so far
as to hint that the real reason Coach Lyle hadn’t let his team face the
Second before was his fear of a disastrous defeat. Toby wondered how
Coach Burtis, pacing tranquilly to and fro along the side-line, his
hands buried in his trousers pockets, could maintain his expression of
unconcern in the face of such direful happenings! Toby would have felt
a heap better if Mr. Burtis had scowled or kicked at a pebble or shown
distress in some other manner. The coach’s unruffled demeanor seemed to
Toby to smack of treason! He was very glad when that farcical game came
to an end with a final score of 33 to 0.

Second, fagged, disheveled, outraged, climbed a weary path to the
gymnasium, muttering threats of vengeance; hearing which Coach Burtis
smiled a secret smile of satisfaction. Toby felt quite disgraced until
the lapse of an hour or two brought a realization of the fact that such
things had happened before and would happen again, and that no one took
them very seriously. At supper Mr. Burtis ate quite as much as usual
and with as much enjoyment, and talked and jested in his accustomed
manner; which encouraged Toby to satisfy a really ravenous hunger.
After a steak and a baked potato and the usual trimmings he found that
he could view the afternoon’s Waterloo with equanimity. There was, he
reflected, another day coming!

Wednesday found Toby learning A Team signals, his allegiance
transferred to that squad by order of the coach. In the scrimmage
Rawson led B Team and Toby adorned the bench until near the end of
the second half. Then Frick came out and Toby went in and received an
evil and portentous wink from Sid Creel. That wink said very plainly:
“You wait till I get at you, you renegade!” Just at first it was a bit
disconcerting to find himself slamming into his former teammates and
to realize that they not only no longer loved him but were eager to
grind his face in the earth and otherwise degrade him! Before the game
was over, though, he had very effectually forgotten the old ties and
was glorying in every foot of territory conquered by A Team. It was
remarkable what a healthy antagonism existed between the two squads.
Before the scrimmage they were all Second Team fellows, and afterwards,
in the locker-room, they fraternized nicely, but while the game lasted
they were enemies and aliens, and neither side asked quarter. Toby,
during a busy six or seven minutes of play that afternoon, was rather
rudely handled by his former comrades, and made his way up the hill
with a ruddy nose and several assorted contusions. But he had the
satisfaction of a touchdown and a brief word of commendation from Coach
Burtis; and nothing else much mattered.

Thursday they went against the First again and, while they were once
more decisively trimmed, they made a far better showing. Toby got
in for the whole of the second half and, after recovering from a
bad attack of stage fright, gave a fairly good account of himself.
Toby wasn’t one to seek personal glory, and there were times when he
might have taken the ball himself and didn’t. He did get off one good
twenty-yard sprint with the pigskin clasped in the cradle of his elbow,
and got a hearty thump on his back from Arnold as he trotted by that
member of the enemy forces and a rousing acclaim from the stands. But
for the rest Toby stayed modestly in position, letting Nelson and White
and, less frequently, Stover, perform the back-field stunts――or try to.
First Team was fast rounding into a hard-working, aggressive, snappy
organization, and facing her was no child’s play. That the Second held
her to four scores that day, and credited herself with a field-goal,
speaks well for Coach Burtis’ charges. Second didn’t consider that she
had actually wiped out the stigma of Tuesday’s overwhelming defeat, but
she derived a lot of comfort from her showing, and White, whose capable
foot had secured that goal from the field, was a twenty-four hour hero.
It was even whispered that Coach Lyle had been seen looking hard at
White and that the latter’s transfer to the First Team was inevitable.
Which, while it may have brought pleasant anticipations to the Second
Team while full-back, filled the rest of the fellows with gloomy
forebodings.

“That’s the way they do,” lamented Farquhar, the rangy left tackle.
“Just as soon as we get a fellow so’s he’s some use to us they nab him
for the First. What’s the use of that? If they want us to give ’em
good practice they ought to let us have some decent players. But they
don’t. Last year they swiped three of our fellows two weeks before the
Broadwood game. They make me very weary!”

However, it seemed that Second’s fears might be groundless, for Friday
found White still with them, and he was still with them the following
day when the First went up against Forest Hill School.




CHAPTER XIII

TEAM-MATES FALL OUT


It was a brute of a day, with a chilling, drizzling rain and a sodden,
sloppy field. Toby had been out of sorts since the moment of his
awakening to a dimly-lighted room and the sound of dripping eaves. He
had pecked at his breakfast, more than usually averse to the ruddiness
of his steak and willing to exchange a whole pitcher of milk for one
heartening cup of hot coffee. Recitations went badly. There was an
evident listlessness on the part of the students and a consequent lack
of sympathy on the part of the instructors. In Latin Toby made a horrid
mess of things, his brain having apparently forgotten to function, and
“Chawles,” as Mr. Coburn was known among the boys, became quite testy
and rendered a lengthy oration on the shortcomings of the class, which,
while intended for the entire assemblage, was aimed directly at Toby.
I mention these incidents that you may better understand what happened
in the afternoon when the Second Team stood rather morosely around in
the drizzle and waited for practice to start and Toby, hands rolled in
his sweater, glowered across to where the First Team was warming up for
the Forest Hill contest and damp but enthusiastic cheers arose from the
stands. It seemed to Toby that a whole lot of fellows, including T.
Tucker, were wasting the golden moments of life in vain pursuits. Could
Toby have chosen an occupation just then he would have been a bearded
and brawny pirate afloat on a tropic sea, a cutlass between his teeth
and an assortment of pistols thrust in his blood-red sash. Which shows
that Toby’s normally gentle and sane disposition had a bad kink in it
to-day.

And at such an inopportune moment Roy Frick, whose disposition, unlike
Toby’s, was never worthy of being termed gentle, saw fit to make
himself obnoxious. In justice to Frick it should be explained that he
had an inherent dislike for the sensation of raindrops trickling down
the back of his neck, which sensation he was now having. Frick was
a sturdily-made, hard-muscled fellow of seventeen with a broad, not
ill-favored face. He was vain, arrogant and pugnacious, although there
were those who said that he liked to talk fight better than he liked
to fight. Perhaps in an effort to forget his misery, Frick had taken
a ball from the canvas sack in which they were brought to the field
and was passing with Lippman. Frick was behind Toby, but the latter
was dimly aware of what was going on, just as he was aware of the
late-comers, George Tubb among them, who were dawdling down from the
gymnasium. Once the pigskin, made slippery by the rain, escaped from
Frick and bobbed across the wet turf to where Toby stood, and Toby sent
it trickling back with a touch of his foot. Perhaps there was something
antagonistic in the brief, careless glance exchanged with Frick, for
Toby felt antagonistic to everything at the moment. In any case, Frick
doubtless resented that look, and a minute later the football collided
with a dull, damp thump against the back of Toby’s head.

“Sorry!” called Frick grinning. “The ball’s slippery, Tucker.”

Toby flushed, walked onto the gridiron, where the pigskin was wobbling
erratically about, and picked it up. Then, facing the longest stretch
of the field and trying to recall all he had learned of punting, he
swung his right foot against the dropping ball and was rewarded with
a very healthy-sounding thump. Such a performance in a game would
have won him applause, for the ball, in spite of its sodden condition,
arched toward the further corner of the field in a fine, long flight
and came to earth a full forty-five yards away. But there was no
applause on this occasion, unless the amused glances of those who
happened to see the feat could have been construed as applausive. Frick
came running, his face redder than Toby’s had been.

“What’s the idea, Tucker?” he demanded threateningly. “You go and fetch
that now!”

“Not likely,” answered Toby in a growl.

“Yes, you will, or I’ll knock your red head off! You get it, do you
hear?”

Toby’s face paled from red to white. “Yes, I hear,” he said in a
low and steady voice. He covered the distance of a scant yard that
separated them in one quick step. “I hear a lot I don’t take stock in,
Frick. I hear you’re a fighter, for instance!”

Frick’s right arm went back, elbow crooked, hand clenched, and his
right foot moved back with it, but Toby didn’t wait. Instead, he
stepped suddenly forward with his own left foot and thrust shoulder and
flattened hand against Frick’s chest with the result that the latter
staggered back, failed to recover his balance and sat down hard. He was
up in an instant, his eyes blazing, silent, and just a bit doubtful.
And Toby, who had followed, stood ready. But, while a fight would have
been a welcome relief from boredom, the others interposed. Watson and
Farquhar and Sid Creel and several more got between the opponents with
words of caution and displeasure.

“Cut it, you chumps!” said the big center, pushing Frick away. “Here
comes Mr. Burtis!”

“What do I care?” cried Frick. “Think he’s going to knock me down and
get away with it? Let go of me, Ben, or I’ll――I’ll smash you! I will!
Take your hands――――”

But Watson wouldn’t, and Farquhar was there too, soothing and
ridiculing, and every one had mixed in and the incident was perforce
closed. And lest Toby, who really seemed quite calm and peaceable,
should attempt to continue the discussion, Sid Creel and Stover stood
guard over him. And onto the scene strode Coach Burtis and Captain
Beech, suspicious but asking no questions, and every one strolled
casually somewhere else and looked very innocent.

“What was the trouble?” whispered Sid Creel as he and Toby wandered
along the side-line. Toby related the incident in a few words, and Sid
observed him curiously.

“Gee, you must have had a grouch,” he exclaimed wonderingly. “Never
knew you had a temper like that, Toby!”

“Well, I have,” answered Toby dryly. “Of course, it was a silly thing
to do, but he had no business lamming me with that wet ball!”

Sid grinned. “Well, it wasn’t his fault the ball was wet, was it?” he
asked.

Toby managed a weak smile. “It’s his fault he will have to chase after
it,” he answered.

But of course Frick didn’t have to do any such thing. There is always
some obliging person about in such an emergency, and it was young
Lovett, hopeful candidate for end position, who scurried off and
brought it back to an indignant Gyp. Then practice began and every one
had other things to think of for the succeeding hour. Now and again
Toby and Roy Frick encountered each other, on which occasions Frick
glowered or sneered and Toby pretended to have forgotten the other’s
existence. Toby was rather ashamed of himself by now and quite willing
to consider the affair closed.

There was no scrimmage this afternoon, and at a little after four the
squad was dismissed. Taking only time enough to wrap themselves in
blankets, the Second hurried in a body across to the other gridiron and
won a ripple of laughter as they appeared like so many blue wraiths,
around the corner of the covered stand. It seemed like an accident, but
possibly wasn’t, that George Tubb scuttled into the seat next to Toby.

“Guess that guy would have mopped the ground up with you if the fellows
hadn’t butted in,” observed George with one of his malicious grins.
“He’s a lot heavier than you, Tucker.”

“I had a lucky escape then,” replied Toby. “Know what the score is
here?”

“Nothing to nothing. Forest Hill’s too fast for those First Team yaps.
Say, I wish Frick would try to get gay with me some day! I don’t like
that blow-hard.”

“Perhaps he will,” said Toby pleasantly. “At least, you can hope, Tubb.”

George eyed him suspiciously. Toby’s tone had suggested that he viewed
the idea with favor. George grunted. “Well, if he ever does he will get
a lot more’n he expects,” he growled. “You ought to have handed him a
punch instead of just pushing him, Tucker. He’ll be after you the first
chance he gets. They say he’s a clever scrapper, too.”

“Do they?” asked Toby indifferently. “Then there’ll probably be enough
left for you to tackle, Tubb.”

The third period ended just then, and Toby’s gaze, turning away from
the players, encountered Tubb’s. For some reason Tubb colored, and then
blurted: “Say, you never came around to the room like you said you were
going to, Tucker. You’re getting sort of choosey, too, I suppose.”

“I called last week, Tubb. You were out. Didn’t Ramsey tell you?”

“Yes. I forgot. How’d you know I’d be out?” Again that objectionable
grin! Toby frowned.

“I didn’t,” he said shortly. Then: “Can’t you ever be decent, Tubb?” he
asked. “This thing of always having a chip on your shoulder is a bit
tiresome.”

“I haven’t any chip.” Tubb laughed a mixture of apology and defiance.
“I’ve got some――some pride, though! No fellow needs to know me if he
doesn’t want to!”

“That goes without saying,” answered Toby dryly.

George scowled darkly. “Well, it’s so. A lot of you guys with
wrist-watches make me tired! Gee, if――――”

“I don’t happen to wear a wrist-watch, Tubb, and making you tired
is nothing in my young life,” said Toby wearily. “Let’s cut out the
love-pats. I’m not feeling awfully gay to-day. How do you like playing
end?”

“All right,” replied George after a moment. “If Mr. Burtis wasn’t a
bonehead, though, he’d let me play half. I always have played half.”

“Always?” asked Toby, idly, watching Snowden kick-off to Forest Hill.
“How long is ‘always’?”

“Well, last year and some the year before. I was the best back on our
team, anyway!”

“I didn’t know you had played so much. When I asked you――――”

“Oh, well, you sounded so blamed patronizing,” growled George.

“Didn’t mean to. I’m glad you stuck it out on the squad, Tubb. Beech
said the other day that――well, he seemed to think you were going to
make a pretty good end.”

“Huh!” said George scornfully. “I could show him some real end playing
right now if he’d give me a chance! But he’s stuck on Mawson and
Connell.” In spite of his words, Toby got the idea that George was
nevertheless pleased by the compliment to his playing. “I suppose they
belong to the same Society Beech does!”

“No, as a matter of fact, Tubb, Beech is Cambridge and Connell is
Oxford. I don’t know which Mawson is, but I don’t think it matters. I
wouldn’t make remarks of that sort if I were you. Fellows don’t like
them.”

If Tubb made any reply Toby didn’t hear it, for Halliday had got
away around Forest Hill’s left and pulled down a long and desperate
forward-pass, and now he was streaking up the field with the ball and
the stand was on its feet, shouting and imploring. Halliday dodged the
first of the enemy and sped on. Then the Forest Hill quarter was on
him, there was a confusion of rolling bodies and Ted was free again
to go plunging on toward the nearing goal-line. The pursuit gained
but never quite reached him, and Ted at last subsided between the
posts. That was all the scoring done by either team, and shortly after
Captain Fanning had missed an easy goal the game ended. The visitors
considered, and not without reason, that they had virtually won the
honors of the day and departed cheering through the twilight drizzle.




CHAPTER XIV

TOBY AT QUARTER


The outcome of the Forest Hill game was a favorite topic of discussion
during the next few days. Although Yardley had won in the last four
minutes, by means of a well-earned touchdown following a forward pass,
the general opinion was that the Blue had been largely outplayed by
a lighter but much faster eleven. Of course, reverses were to be
expected, but after Yardley’s showing in the Tyron game it did seem
that she should have done better against a “small school team” like
Forest Hill. On the other hand, the local football historians reminded
that some six seasons ago, Forest Hill had actually won from Yardley, 5
to 3, and that it was no uncommon thing for the smaller school to score
against the Blue.

Rumors of changes in the line-up spread, and it was whispered that all
was not serene between captain and coach. Arnold was decidedly glum
that Saturday evening, and, although the usual excursion to Greenburg
in search of moving picture thrills was made, he was no great addition
to the company. Afterwards, when they were preparing for bed, Toby told
him that he was foolish to let football worry him so. “Any one might
think you were captain of the eleven instead of Fanning,” said Toby.
“You act――――”

“I wish I was――were――was――――”

“‘Were’ will do. Why do you wish you was――were?”

“Because I’d drop two or three of the ‘dead-ones’ and have a team
instead of a bunch of stars!”

Toby weighed that in silence. Finally: “Who are the ‘dead-ones’?” he
asked.

Arnold shook his head. “Guess I oughtn’t to talk about it,” he
muttered. “It’s not my business.”

“Right you are! Just remember that. If it’s not your business, don’t
worry about it.”

“That’s easy enough to say,” Arnold grumbled. After a moment he said
explosively, dropping a shoe to the floor in emphasis: “Why Mr. Lyle
doesn’t jump in and fire a couple of those fellows is what gets me! If
he hasn’t got the backbone to stand up against Tom he oughtn’t to be
coach.”

“Oh, well, the season’s young yet,” answered Toby easily. “Maybe Mr.
Lyle is sort of ‘watchful waiting.’ I’m thinking of going to sleep.
When you get through holding your foot in your hand and making faces
you might put out the light. It works quite easily. You just turn the
thingumbob there. Don’t blow it out, please, because――――”

“Because it might stop your chatter! All right. Good-night.”

The rumored changes in the First Team line-up didn’t materialize,
however; at least not during the following week. Arnold reported that
things were going better and gave credit to Mr. Lyle, who, it seemed,
had delivered a few well-chosen words on Monday, before practice. “He’s
really got some of the loafers at work,” said Arnold. “Even Stone is
showing a little animation!”

“Stone being one of the ‘dead-ones’?”

“Well, he hasn’t looked very much alive until this week,” answered
Arnold. “I dare say we’ll get our gait by Saturday. They say Brown and
Young’s is a tough bunch of scrappers. I hope they are. We need to go
up against something that has a wallop!”

“You did that very thing yesterday,” said Toby.

“You’re not far off, at that,” agreed the other. “Your team put up a
mighty pretty scrap. If you’d been half as good on defense as you were
on attack――――”

“Oh, well, I noticed that we held you fellows twice inside our thirty.
Hold your horses. We’ll be beating you badly by the end of the month!”

“Rather fancy yourself, don’t you?” jeered Arnold. “By the way, was
that your friend Tubbs who played left end for you in the last half?”

“Tubb is the gentleman’s name. What did you think of him?”

“Why, he acted like a crazy Indian! He made me nervous looking at him,
and hearing him!”

Toby laughed. “That’s his style, Arn. It’s psychological, you see. He
distracts the attention of the opponent from the game. All that jumping
and up and down and running around and talking is just to get your
goat!”

“Well, he came near getting it, all right! He made as much row as a
Broadwood shortstop with the bases full and two down! But he seemed
to me to be playing a pretty good game, just the same. He was into
everything!”

“Beech says he’s a comer, Arn. If he could only get over the idea that
he’s being imposed on by every one he’d get on a heap better.”

“He’s a chronic sorehead and kicker, I suppose. I’ve met one or two
like him. Maybe he will get over it in time. How’s that other protégé
of yours, the tennis fiend?”

“Ramsey? I don’t see much of him nowadays. But I know that he’s got in
with a fairly decent lot of chaps and looks about fifty per cent better
than he did. I told you about his freezing me one night when I went to
see him? Had both windows wide open and told me he couldn’t get along
without plenty of fresh air. Bet you anything he’d never slept with a
window open in his life until Muscles got at him! You know, I think I
can take a bit of credit for the――the rejuvenation of friend Ramsey!”

“Well, that’s some word, but I dare say you’re right. Now all you’ve
got to do is make Mr. Tubbs over and you’re through.”

“Tubb is a hard-boiled one, Arn, and I haven’t much hope of him. If
I liked him a bit better I suppose I’d take more interest in his
career――――”

“I wish you’d stop talking like a blooming dictionary,” groaned Arnold.
“Now dry up and let me take a fall out of this math.”

That week saw two changes in the Second Team. Sid Creel displaced
Watson at center and George Tubb was shifted from B Team to A. He and
Mawson were used impartially and in the four games that the Second
played against the First that week there appeared to be little choice
between them. The same could be as truthfully said of Toby and Roy
Frick. Sometimes one started the game and sometimes the other, but each
had an equal chance. Toby had his shortcomings and so did his rival,
Toby’s concerning individual play and Frick’s generalship. Or, perhaps,
leadership would be a better word to use. Somehow, or so it seemed
to those whose business it was to note such things, the Second Team
showed more life and aggressiveness when Toby’s shrill voice called
the signals. For Toby’s voice _was_ shrill when he played quarter,
though at other times it was an ordinary tenor of middle register, with
a pleasant touch of Long Island fog in it. But that first day, when
unexpectedly called on to act as quarter-back, Toby’s nervousness had
sent his voice several notes up the scale, and for some reason it had
never come down again so long as he was giving signals. Arnold likened
it to the yelping of a fox terrier one day, and on the next occasion
Toby tried hard to bring it back to normal, with the result that it
sounded as hoarse as a frog with a bad cold, and no one could hear him!

But at individual playing of the position, Roy Frick was better. Frick
was a tricky runner and frequently squirmed outside tackles for needed
gains. And he was a dependable punter. Possibly Toby would have showed
up better beside Frick at this time if he had had more faith in his own
ability, but he was chary of trusting to his own efforts to advance the
ball. On catching punts and running them in, he was not much behind his
rival, and at punting he was fast catching up with him. But there was
no doubt that from the spectator’s point of view Frick was the man for
the job.

There had been no resumption of hostilities between the two. Toby was
willing to forgive and forget, although he secretly disliked Frick for
the latter’s overbearing manner. For his part, Frick had evidently
neither forgiven nor forgotten, but he seemed satisfied to let the
matter rest as it was. Toby had an idea that the other frequently
ridiculed his playing, for sometimes he caught looks of stifled
amusement on the faces of Frick’s cronies. As, however, they were
seldom on the bench at the same time and, being in different classes
and having different circles of friends, scarcely ever encountered each
other off the football field, there was little chance for a clash. At
training table Frick sat four places from Toby on the same side of the
board; and, anyway, at table personal animosities would not be allowed
to flourish. Save for an occasional Sunday, Coach Burtis was always in
his place at the head, and he had a watchful eye and a careful ear.

On Friday, contrary to custom, the Second Team was led across to the
other gridiron for a twelve-minute bout with the First. The First had
not pleased Coach Lyle since the Forest Hill game, and the morrow’s
contest, with Brown and Young’s School would demand all the Blue had.
Toby was sent in at quarter. He noted two changes in the First Team’s
line. Casement was playing right guard in place of Snow and Candee was
at center in Simpson’s stead. Coach Burtis had instructed him to give
the First’s center and right side the brunt of the line attack, and
Toby understood now that the substitutes there were to be put to the
test. He wondered if either of them suspected and whether their own
coach had instigated the ordeal. He felt a bit sorry for Snow, who was
rather light for a guard, and hoped he wouldn’t get used too roughly.

There was no kick-off to-day. Instead, Second was given the ball
in the middle of the field. Coaches and trainers hovered about
like hawks around a chicken yard, and there was much exhorting and
last-moment instructing. First Team had been keyed up to the minute,
and faces showed strain and poised bodies tension. Toby had Nelson,
Lippman, and Crawford behind him, and it was Lippman he chose for
that first attack. His voice yelped, Farquhar, left tackle, trotted
over to the right of the line, the signal came, and Lippman, seizing
the ball at a hand-pass, smashed ahead. Crawford and Toby piled in
behind. The First Team line buckled and snapped back again. Jim Rose,
big and pink-cheeked, roared defiance. “Second down! Nine!” shouted
the referee. Toby grabbed an arm and pulled Lippman out of the pile.
Already he was shouting new signals. Again Farquhar shifted, again
Lippman took the pass. But this time he shot obliquely to the left,
the whole back-field behind him, and plunged at Snow. Through he went,
fighting, squirming, turning! two yards――three――four――Then the rout was
stayed. A faint “Down” and the blowing of the whistle came together.
Toby arose from some one’s unquiet legs and added another note to his
voice:

“That’s the stuff, Second! That’s working! Come on, now! Let’s get ’em
again! Signal!”

“Five to go!” cried the referee, skipping away.

“Hold that side! Hold that side!” shouted Fanning.

“That was on you, Snow!” Mr. Lyle’s voice was ice-cold. “Don’t let them
do it again!”

“Come on, Yardley! Throw ’em back!” called Curran, up-field. “Watch for
a forward, there, Ted!”

Again Second smashed at the First’s right guard and center, and again
the latter yielded. But Crawford had made only a yard and a half, and
now it was fourth down and the forty-yard line was still a good ten
feet distant. Grover Beech pulled Toby’s head down and whispered, and
Toby gave back a doubtful glance. But Beech’s word was law so long
as it didn’t transgress the coach’s instructions, and Toby yielded.
“Farquhar back!” he called. “Hold that line, Second!” Farquhar trotted
to a kicking position and Nelson slipped into the line. First scented
a fake, but covered her field nevertheless. Then the ball shot back to
Lippman and he set out around his end, Toby leading. For a moment the
play looked good, for First had drawn her back-field away, but Sanford
eluded Connell and sent Toby sprawling and Roover got Lippman two
yards short of the distance.

First made two at the Second’s left and then kicked. Crawford misjudged
the ball badly on his twenty-five yards and it went over his head. Toby
fell on it on his fifteen, and two First Team men fell on him. Second
plugged the center again for two, and again for one. Then, on a delayed
pass, Crawford squirmed through Snow for eight yards and first down.
What a scolding there was then! Coach Lyle fairly raised welts. Some
one called for time, and Toby, still short of breath from being sat on
by the First Team ends, was very glad. Beech led him back.

“Watch Stone,” he said. “He’s coming away in on those plays. Slip one
through outside him, Tucker. There’s a fine hole there!”

Toby nodded. “Got to bang the center, though, Beech. Coach’s orders.
I’ll try it, though, first time they tighten.”

Toby shifted his line to the left, and First massed to meet the attack.
Lippman failed at center, Candee standing like a rock. On a fake-kick,
Crawford struck the line hard, but made less than a yard. Crawford
gained three through Snow. Farquhar dropped back and Lippman dashed
outside Stone and reeled off six yards before he was stopped. With one
to go on fourth down, Toby elected to punt, and Farquhar dropped the
pigskin on the First’s thirty-yard line. Roover brought it back to near
the center of the field before Beech pulled him down.

First worked a neat forward-pass that netted seventeen yards and then
smashed through center for five more. Second held twice and First
booted over the line. On the twenty-five Toby returned to the attack on
Snow and Candee and gained six in three downs. A fake-kick resulted in
a fumble and the pigskin went to First on the opponent’s twenty-two.
There was no holding the First Team then and she scored in seven plays,
Snowden landing the ball near the corner of the field. The punt-out was
not allowed and the teams went back to the fifty. Coach Lyle took pity
on Snow and that much-mauled youth was removed in favor of Casement.
For the Second, Stover and White came on for Lippman and Crawford,
and George Tubb for Mawson. Again the kick-off was barred and Second
given the ball. Toby tried the new right guard with no gain, got Stover
around left for three, failed once more at center and himself punted to
First’s twenty. First kicked on second down, Snowden getting nearly
fifty yards. Stover caught and dodged back for ten. From the forty,
Tubb swung around back and gained midfield on a fine run around the
enemy’s left end. Then Toby fumbled and Rose captured the ball for the
First. Another forward pass, Curran to Halliday, took the First to the
Second’s twenty-four, and from there the First battered her way across
for the second score. Before she got it, however, Toby retired groggily
and Frick took his place. Toby had ill-advisedly allowed Snowden to sit
on his stomach. Frick’s labor was soon over, however, for the First
Team’s second touchdown practically ended the game.




CHAPTER XV

THE “TOUGH BUNCH”


No one seemed satisfied with the day’s performance. The First resented
the enemy’s gains through their line and the Second declared stoutly
that if they had been taught a decent defense against forward-passes
the First would never have scored. Arnold told Toby later that Coach
Lyle had read the riot act afterwards. “I didn’t know he could be so
rude,” said Arnold sadly.

“Why didn’t you get in to-day?” Toby asked from the window-seat where,
propped on many cushions, he looked pale and interesting.

“Lyle wanted to give you fellows a show.”

“Well, Bates didn’t do a whole lot,” said Toby. “You’re pretty punk,
Arn, but you’ve got it over him. Gee, if I hadn’t made that rotten
fumble on the fifty yards that time we might have held you fellows to a
measly six points!”

“Yes, not! Son, that fumble of yours didn’t affect the game a mite. It
was forward-passing that beat you chaps. Your ends were no good at all.
Even your friend Mr. Tubb was fast asleep.”

“I know. We’ve got no sort of a defense for forward-passes. I called
the turn on that second one, but Farquhar was away out of position and
Tubb let Roover get right by him. You wait another week, though! We’re
getting your measure, Arn! What about to-morrow? Are you going to play?”

“Ask Mr. Lyle. I suppose I’ll get a show sometime, though. I sure want
to. They say Brown and Young’s are regular bearcats! What time is it
getting to be? I’m as hungry as the dickens. Let’s go!”

The Second Team had no practice Saturday, which, for some of its
members, was fortunate, since the First had managed to deal very
harshly with them during the brief period of yesterday’s game. Toby,
although he had nothing to show in the way of scars, was tired and
lame when he crawled out of bed in the morning, and not until he had
shivered under a shower-bath, groaningly rubbed himself pink and done
two minutes of setting-up exercises in front of an open window which
admitted the frostly tingle of the October morning did the usual
feeling of well-being return. After that he was able to reach chapel
without protests from lame muscles and, later, do full justice to a
breakfast of cereal, eggs, toast, stewed fruit, and milk.

Fortunately, on Saturday mornings recitations were few, for, save
during a brief midwinter period when outdoor sports were at a
standstill, preoccupation was always noticeable on the part of the
student body on that day of the week. Such a condition of mind was
especially evident this forenoon, due, probably, to the fact that
Yardley’s opponent in the afternoon had been heralded as a strong team
with a proclivity for “roughing it.” Yardley, as much as any school and
perhaps more than many, held for clean playing, but there was enough
of the “Old Adam” there to make a bit of scrapping interesting. Its
attitude was well explained by a remark made by Will Curran, the First
Team quarter, in front of Oxford between recitations.

“If they’re mean players we’ll lick them,” said Curran. “I never saw a
team yet who could play dirty ball and win as long as the other fellow
played clean. But my guess is that they won’t play dirty. That sort of
stuff doesn’t go here, and I think they know it. If they don’t know it
they’ll mighty soon find it out! They’ll play clean if we have to slug
’em to make ’em!”

Which statement, although made in all sincerity and with a perfectly
sober countenance, met with a ripple of laughter from his hearers.
“That’s the idea, Will!” approved Frank Lamson. “We’ll have peace if we
have to fight for it!”

Brown and Young’s School was a new institution and a large one.
You saw its half-page advertisements in the magazines every month.
Although a city school, it emphasized athletics and had a field that
any university might have been proud of, with a stadium that was an
architectural triumph. There were those who opined that Brown and
Young’s graduates were likely to be better grounded in football,
baseball and track athletics than in scholarly studies, but possibly
such persons were disgruntled by a Brown and Young’s defeat. For Brown
and Young’s took athletics seriously and pursued victory on diamond,
gridiron or rink most strenuously. And, it must be acknowledged, Brown
and Young’s had won many laurels. Yardley had met her last spring in
baseball, but this was the first gridiron contest between the two. On
the diamonds Brown and Young’s had proved noisy, argumentative and a
trifle rough in the pinches, and had accepted a 3 to 2 defeat not very
graciously, but she had not been guilty of unfair tactics. Perhaps, as
Tom Fanning said, she liked to be thought a bit “tough” in the hope
that her adversaries would either be afraid or try to beat her at
toughness and get caught doing it. In any event, Yardley received a
strict warning from Coach Lyle before the game.

“Any fellow who tries dirty work will come out,” he declared. “If the
officials don’t put him off, I will. Just remember that. If Brown and
Young’s don’t play clean it’s up to the officials. We’ve heard that
these fellows are a ‘tough bunch,’ a win-at-any-cost team, but you
can’t believe everything you hear. So don’t go into the game looking
for trouble. Maybe it isn’t there. If they should try the rough-stuff,
your captain will call the officials’ attention to it. Just you keep
your hands and your temper down and your heads up. Play as hard as you
know how, fellows, but play fair.”

It was an ideal football day, crisp and sunny, with almost no wind.
Frost had left the field a bit soft but not sufficiently so to affect
any one’s game. Greenburg turned out a good audience, which, added to
the Yardley rooters and a half-hundred Brown and Young’s followers,
nearly filled the stands by three o’clock. Toby had Sid Creel and
Grover Beech for companions, and, reaching the field early, they got
first row seats directly behind the Yardley bench. Brown and Young’s
came on first, a capable-looking squad of thirty or so, accompanied
by a regular retinue of noncombatants; a head coach and an assistant
coach, a couple of managers, a trainer, an assistant trainer and two
rubbers.

“Guess the Principal must be ill,” said Beech dryly. “I don’t see him
anywhere.”

“Maybe he’s one of the cheer leaders,” suggested Sid. “Those are sure
some gaudy togs of theirs!”

Sid had reference to the enemy’s orange sweaters and
orange-and-black-ringed stockings.

“Princeton colors,” said Beech. “Doubtless showing a predilection for
that university on the part of our noble opponent.”

“How do you get that way?” inquired Sid slangily. “Brown and Young’s
fellows don’t go to Princeton.”

“Don’t they?” asked Toby innocently. “Where do they go?”

“Into professional baseball,” answered Sid in triumph.

Beech grinned approval of the bon mot, but said that he didn’t believe
there was room in professional baseball for them all. Sid didn’t argue
the matter, for Yardley trotted around the corner of the stand just
then and the cheer leaders were bellowing for “A regular Yardley cheer,
fellows, for the Team!”

After that, with four elevens warming up on the gridiron, there was
too much to watch for conversation to flourish. Instead, the talk
ran something like this: “Noyes is driving the scrubs.”――“Simpson’s
back at center, Cap.”――“Gee, that was some punt! Wonder if they
can do that in the game!”――“Oh, you Ted Halliday!”――“Look at
the size of that guy, will you? Must be their center.”――“Right
guard. He’d make two of Casement!”――“Those chaps have got a heap
of pep, haven’t they?”――“How’re you betting, Cap?”――“Watch that
yellow-leg kicking goals down there, fellows! He hasn’t missed one
yet!”――“Hello, Andy! Who’s going to win?”――“Who’s the little chap
in the gray sweater?”――“Cornish, of Trinity. He’s umpiring. He’s
good, too.”――“Those fellows can cheer, can’t they? Rotten name for a
school, though; Brown and Young’s. Sounds like they were advertising
a department store!”――“Must be most time to start. Three minutes of?
There goes Fanning now. Is that the referee with him?”――“Good-looking
guy, that Brown and Young’s captain.”――“Fan lost the toss! Sure he
did! What? Oh, that’s different! Still, I don’t see――――”――“Every one
up! Bust yourself, Toby! Rah! Rah! Rah!――――”

Then, when the rival cheers had floated off across the river and
the gold-and-russet marshes beyond, the stands became momentarily
silent and the referee’s voice sounded clearly: “All ready, Brown
and Young?――Ready, Yardley?” Then the whistle piped and a tall
yellow-sleeved tackle swung a striped leg and sent the new ball
hurtling down the field.

It was a long, high kick, and well-placed, and when Snowden had
gathered it into his arms and doubled himself over it the enemy was
almost on him. A scant eight yards he made, by dint of much twisting
and feinting, and then he was pulled down. Yardley made one stab at
the opponent’s left and gained two. Then the ball went back to Snowden
and was hurled well up the field to the left. Roover was quite alone
when it reached him, and he trailed off a dozen yards before he was
forced outside. The play had caught the enemy napping, and it had
suddenly moved the game from Yardley to Brown and Young’s territory,
for when the ball was paced in and grounded it lay just short of the
enemy’s forty yards. The Blue’s cohorts cheered and shouted and waved,
while, from across the field, came a snappy, undismayed cheer from the
Orange-and-Black.

Another slight gain outside left tackle, and again the pigskin shot
back to Snowden. This time the big full-back started off toward his
right as if he meant to turn the end, but, challenged, he threw a
lateral to Arnold Deering, and Arnold, behind good interference, raced
to the adversary’s twenty-eight before he was set on savagely and
tumbled head over heels. Fortunately he held tight to the ball. The
Yardley stand was in an uproar of triumph and delight. Dismay showed
in the ranks of the enemy. Toby saw the Brown and Young’s quarter,
a spindly, nervous-mannered youth, look back apprehensively at the
goal-posts as he retreated up the field yelling strident encouragement
to his fellows. Toby felt a certain sympathy with that quarter-back,
enemy or no enemy. Toby had experienced similar apprehension.

Brown and Young’s looked pitifully weak during the next few minutes.
Her opponent’s success had upset her calculations and the suddenness of
events had left her gasping and rattled. From the twenty-eight yards
Roover carried the ball in two plunges through the Orange’s left to a
position opposite the goal and twenty-one yards away from it. Then
kicking formation was called and Fanning dropped out of the line, his
place being taken by Roover. Brown and Young’s shouted warnings against
a fake, but the cry of “Block that kick!” mingled with them. Captain
Fanning stretched his hands forth, Curran piped his signals, the ball
left Simpson――――

Confusion reigned! Cries filled the air! Yardley swept forward! But
where was the ball? Fanning’s right leg swung against nothing. Deering
was running off to the left, chased by an orange-sleeved end and Brown
and Young’s forwards were piling through. But no one, it seemed, had
the ball! And then, out of the ruck of confusion, shot a flash of blue
that, seen dimly between the heaving forms of friend and foe, resolved
into the likeness of Curran! Straight ahead leaped the quarter-back,
straight at the center of the goal. For five yards he slipped
unchallenged through the very storm center of the battle. Then the ruse
was discovered and the Orange hurled her defenses upon him. But friend
as well as enemy was about him now, and not until the ten-yard line was
underfoot was he tackled. Then, fighting hard, he dragged on for three
more strides, faltered, was borne back and went down under an avalanche
of enemy forms.

“The old delayed pass!” cried Grover Beech almost tearfully in his
joy. “And they fell for it!”

Eight yards to go! Desperately, while the tumult still reigned, Brown
and Young’s lined up under the shadow of her goal. That she could stop
the enemy now was too much to hope, nor did she, though she battled
fiercely. Deering was launched ahead for two yards and Roover made two
more. The shouting had almost ceased from the stands and the Brown and
Young’s quarter could be heard imploring the team to “Hold ’em fellows!
Throw ’em back! Get low! Get low! Hold ’em!” And with his voice came a
medley of others and, sharp, stabbing, through them all, the musketry
of Curran’s signals. Then a sudden heaving of both tense lines, a
concentration of the whole Yardley back-field on the enemy center,
a slow yielding there and, finally, a break, with Snowden, the ball
hugged to his stomach, arching over and through on a sea of squirming
figures!

Well over the last line lay the pigskin, a foot to spare! And as
Yardley trotted back, swinging headguards, cavorting a little, and
Brown and Young’s lined up sullenly beneath the cross-bar, Sid Creel
laid his head in Toby’s lap, kicked Beech lovingly on the shins and
murmured rapturously: “From our twenty yards to their goal in nine
plays! Eighty yards in eight minutes! O Brown, where is thy victory! O
Young, where is thy sting!”

Fanning kicked an easy goal and again Brown and Young’s sent the ball
from the tee. There was a breathless moment while Arnold Deering
juggled the catch and then a clever advance of nearly twenty yards
through half the enemy team. Two attempts at the line netted but three,
and Yardley made her first punt. And for the first time since the game
began Brown and Young’s had the ball in her possession. But disruption
was still evident, and the whistle sounding the end of the first period
came as a welcome of relief to the visitors.

When play was resumed the Orange showed her possibilities, for,
although Yardley stopped her midway between center line and goal and,
having adopted defensive tactics for the time, kicked again on second
down, Brown and Young’s came back with ever increasing determination.

The Orange used a clever and often disconcerting combination of
straight, old-style line-bucking and wide end-running with a remarkably
efficient protection for the man with the ball. She had a bewildering
number of back-field combinations, apparently chiefly designed to
confuse the opponent. The fact that line-attacks and end-runs were
sent off from the same close-up formation of the backs made it hard
for Yardley to guess which was coming. In fact, the Brown and Young’s
system of plays was well calculated to keep the enemy on the anxious
seat, and just so long as her line continued fairly impregnable she was
bound to make gains. So far she had attempted no forward-passing, and
her kicking game was still an unknown quantity. Her plan appeared to
be to hold the ball as long as she could, making the opponent wrest it
from her in the scrimmage.

As the second quarter progressed her attacks became fiercer and her
resistance more stubborn. Her men played well together, and, although
a few stood out above the rest in ability, individual effort was
subordinated to teamwork. It was teamwork that made possible her
running game, for every man had a duty and performed it, and not once
in that period was Yardley able to reach the man with the ball until
he had at least crossed the scrimmage line, and more often he had a
substantial gain to his credit before the Blue’s secondary defense
stopped him. It was principally the fact that, once inside the thirty
yards, Brown and Young’s abandoned end-running for line-plugging that
Yardley’s goal remained intact in that first half. Twice Yardley took
the ball away from her inside the twenty-yard line and punted out of
danger, and twice the Orange hammered or scuttled her way back again,
the whistle halting a march that seemed destined to bring a touchdown.

“That seven points doesn’t look as safe as it did awhile back,”
said Grover Beech as the rival squads trailed off to the gymnasium.
“Considering the way those lads played in the last quarter, I’d say we
were mighty lucky to get it!”

“You’re dead right,” agreed Sid Creel. “They’ve got it all over us on
team-play. They move like a regular machine. Those end-runs of theirs
are the slickest things I’ve seen in an age, and if we don’t find some
way of stopping them we’ll get licked as sure as shooting!”

“There’s just one way to stop them,” said Toby. “That’s to play our
ends further out and bring a back into the line.”

“Then they’d cut inside the end,” said Sid. “That’s old-stuff, sonny.
Pull the opposing end out and then shoot the plays inside him.”

“But with a half-back there――――”

“The trouble is,” said Beech, “you can’t guess when they’re coming.
Half a dozen times I doped it out that they were going to smash the
line and they just fooled me. There’s nothing to give you a hint. I
could see Tom Fanning getting goggle-eyed trying to size up what was
coming. Usually there’s something to give the snap away: a back drops a
foot or two further back or to one side, or he faces a bit the way the
play’s going without meaning to, or you get a hint from the signal. But
these chaps are foxy.”

“I don’t believe they’ve got anything on us as far as their line goes,”
said Sid.

“The only thing they’ve got on us is smoother playing,” declared Beech.
“They’re playing end-of-season football and we’re playing what we’ve
learned and no more.”

“Well, how do they get that way?” growled Sid.

“They go at it harder, I guess. They tell me that that coach of theirs
gets ten thousand a year.”

“Ten thousand dollars!” ejaculated Toby.

“No, eggs,” replied Sid sarcastically. “Well, why not? If he can teach
a team to play like that by midseason he’s worth it.”

“Maybe,” agreed Beech. “If you’re running that kind of a school. But
the best college football coach doesn’t get any more, and――――”

“They say Brown and Young’s has an enrollment this fall of nearly seven
hundred, and it’s only three or four years old,” said Sid. “So I guess
they can afford to pay a real salary to the coach. And I guess it pays
them to afford it. Wonder, though, how much the Principal gets!”

“Oh, the Principal isn’t important,” observed Toby. “I dare say he just
gets his room and meals and stationery, the poor fish! He ought to take
a tumble to himself and study football. I had a sort of an idea I might
be a railroad president or own a bank, or something modest like that,
but I’ve changed my mind. I’m going to be a football coach. It pays
better and the hours are shorter.”

“But think of the responsibility,” chuckled Beech. “Wealth isn’t
everything, Tucker.”

“Say, do these yellow-legs play Broadwood?” demanded Sid.

“No, I don’t believe so. They never have,” replied Beech.

“Too bad. I wish they would. We’d get a dandy line on Broadwood.”

“And Broadwood would get a dandy line on us. Don’t see that it would
help much. Well, here they come again. No, it’s our fellows. Get onto
your job, Fless!”

The cheer leader gave a startled look over his shoulder, grabbed his
big blue megaphone and jumped to his feet. “Come on, Yardley! Every
one up! Regular cheer, with nine ‘Yardleys!’ One! Two!――――”

The only change in the Blue’s line-up at the beginning of the third
period was at left end, where Meadows had displaced Sandford. The
Orange team returned intact. Yardley brought renewed joy to her
supporters in the first few minutes by two long gains, one by means of
a forward-pass and one by means of a seventeen-yard run by Deering,
that took her well into Brown and Young’s territory. But after that the
Orange refused to give and the ball changed hands on her twenty-seven
yards. That Coach Lyle had tried hard to solve the enemy’s running
game was evident on the occasion of the latter’s first attempt to gain
around Yardley’s left. Instead of trying to get through the enemy’s
excellent interference at once, Yardley adopted waiting tactics. So
long as the man with the ball kept on toward the side-line the Blue was
content to let him alone, and the surprising and even amusing spectacle
of fully half of each team streaking in parallel courses across the
field resulted. By these tactics Yardley gained an advantage. Whereas
before she had plunged blindly at the Orange’s interference, often not
knowing where the ball was, she now had time to size up the situation
and bend every energy toward the runner. Brown and Young’s play brought
the whole back-field out laterally, the runner carrying the ball,
either a half or the full-back, well guarded by three interferers, to
whom, once having diverted the opponent’s charge toward the center, was
added an end and tackle who formed what was virtually a rear guard. To
be successful, however, the play demanded that the opposing defense be
drawn through soon after it had started, the interference engaging it
and the man with the ball shooting free at the last moment and turning
in. So as long as the opponent did not challenge, the Orange formation
continued on in a lateral direction until, for a moment, it seemed
that it would simply continue across the side-line and into the stand!
Eventually, however, the runner saw the futility of further waiting
and took the law into his own hands in a desperate effort to save the
play. But as he had to drop back to let his interference pass before
he could turn in he was very promptly nailed and the Orange netted a
six-yard loss. But of course it didn’t work out so well for Yardley
the next time, for the Orange changed her tactics and shot the runner
in at the first opportunity. Nevertheless, the play lost most of its
effectiveness and, toward the end of the contest, was entirely ignored.

In that third period the honors were fairly even, with each team
gaining two first downs and neither penetrating nearer to her
opponent’s goal than the twenty-seven-yard line. Brown and Young’s
punters showed themselves fully equal to either Roover or Snowden and
the rival lines exhibited a similar strength against attack. Perhaps
the Orange’s superiority, if she showed any, was in her aggressiveness,
although it brought no returns so far as scoring was concerned. Each
team in the period might have attempted a field-goal but chose to stand
or fall on rushing. The seven points scored to the credit of Yardley
had regained something of their original value when time was called for
the quarter, although Brown and Young’s rooters were still hopeful and,
across the field, there were many anxious hearts.

Of the sort of playing with which the visitors had been accused, none
had been seen. To be sure, the Orange players played hard and fierce,
and when they tackled the runner always stayed where he was put, but
nothing mean nor underhand had appeared. They did a lot of talking
across the line, and some of their remarks were not in the best taste,
but many of Yardley’s opponents were what the fellows called “gabby”
and the Blue was used to verbal attack.

Play started in the final period with the pigskin in Yardley’s
possession on her opponent’s forty-four yards. Candee had taken
Simpson’s place at center and Twining had substituted Rose at left
guard. On the opposing team two changes in the line and one in the
back-field had been made. Deering plugged through the Orange left for
a short gain and Roover got outside tackle for two yards. Curran threw
to Meadows, who missed the pass, and Roover punted. An Orange back
cut through the Yardley field for nearly twenty yards after catching
and the ball was on Brown and Young’s forty-one. It was then that the
visitors opened their bag of tricks.




CHAPTER XVI

TUBB WINS PROMOTION


First, the Orange changed her back-field formation entirely. Instead
of standing close to the line, three abreast, the two halves and the
full-back retired to a position a good ten yards behind the scrimmage
and spread widely. The quarter stood five yards behind center, crouched
to take the pass. The right tackle shifted to the other side of the
line, toward which, at the start of the signal, the three backs made
a quarter-turn. But as the ball went back to the quarter the three
swung to the right and started diagonally toward the end of their
line, left half and full aiming at a point just outside it and right
half deploying further to the right. At the same moment the right end
began sprinting straight toward the side-line, drawing the Yardley left
tackle and a defensive back with him.

Having taken the ball from center, the quarter-back started also to
the right, running parallel to the line until, left half and full
having crossed in front of him, he was behind right end’s original
position. There he slowed and shot the pigskin away at a lateral pass
to the right half. The throw was some fifteen yards and perfectly made,
and the right half, as yet unmolested, had no difficulty in getting it.
Whereupon he set forth on his adventures, heading straight along the
side-line and about twelve yards away from it. The opposing end had
been blanketed by the full-back and it was not until the runner crossed
the line of scrimmage that serious opposition to his advance developed.
And then, with his own end and left half guarding his flank and the
quarter making trouble for the rear attack, he proceeded brilliantly
across the middle of the field and set his eyes on the goal.

Yardley, suspecting something unusual and spectacular, had played her
ends back and out and deployed three backs up the field. Halliday, at
right end, had been rudely set aside, and it was Curran and Roover
on whom the task of stopping the runner devolved. Roover, nearer at
hand, did his best to get past the interference but failed, although
in failing he upset the Brown and Young’s full-back. By now the whole
field was in pursuit, with, however, most of it hopelessly out of the
race. Yet Casement, who for a guard was remarkably fast on his feet,
somehow managed to get to the fore and sent the Orange quarter-back
spinning aside, after which he put out for the runner. But Curran was
the man for the job.

Slowing as he neared the prey, he feinted as though to pass behind
the Orange left half who was running about three yards inside the man
with the ball. The half, guessing that the enemy would do the thing he
appeared not to be doing, ran on, and Curran, leaping forward, circled
behind him. And, although the half challenged, throwing himself between
Curran and his team-mate, Curran managed somehow to meet the impact
and, carried forward by his own momentum, seized one Yellow-and-Black
leg ere it twinkled beyond his reach. The man with the ball added
another yard to his gain, dragging Curran with him, but that weight was
not to be denied and he came to his knees. Then Casement flattened him
out, friend and foe labored breathlessly up and the whistle blew.

Brown and Young’s had made a gain of nearly thirty yards, for when
the ball had been wrested from the tenacious grip of the Orange right
half-back it went down just short of Yardley’s thirty-yard line.
Orange-hued banners waved wildly on the east stand while Yardley gave a
well-deserved cheer for the rival half-back.

Brown and Young’s had her eyes on the goal-line now and it seemed that
she was not to be denied. Twice she hurled her full-back through for
short gains at left guard, and then, using the new formation again,
worked as pretty a quarter-back run around her left end as had ever
been seen on Yardley Field. With the ball on the seventeen yards,
she tried the line once more and split through for half the needed
distance, the Blue’s left crumpling badly. Twining took the place of
Rose, and another attempt on the left gained a scant yard. With four
to go on third down, Brown and Young’s made all preparations for a
place-kick, and a big, long-legged tackle ranged back to position.
Yet Yardley refused to believe in that kick. The Orange needed seven
points to tie, and it wasn’t likely that, with only a short time left,
she would satisfy herself with a mere three points. And so, although
everything pointed to a kick from placement, Fanning and Curran sounded
their warnings and the backs hovered anxiously midway between line and
goal. Then, at last, the ball sped back.

But it never reached the outstretched hands of the tackle. Instead,
it went to a half-back and, as the Blue’s forwards desperately broke
through, the half poised the pigskin calmly until Casement was almost
on him and then as calmly sped it over the mêlée diagonally into the
waiting arms of his right end. And that youth had but to take two
strides to cross the last white line. When he was pulled down he was
almost behind the right goal post.

How that end got into position for receiving the pass unnoticed none
on the Yardley team ever knew. One moment he wasn’t there and the next
moment he was. Halliday and Deering, theoretically at least, shared the
blame, although, as Fanning generously said afterwards, a forward-pass
was the last thing expected. Not once before had the enemy attempted a
forward from ordinary formation, and unconsciously Yardley had grown to
think that that play was not included in her plan of battle. As it was,
Arnold had seen the ball hurtling toward the corner of the field and
had leaped forward with a sick feeling at his heart. But he had been a
fraction of a moment too late. The end had made the catch ere Arnold
reached him, and although Arnold threw desperate arms toward him the
end eluded them and went free until Curran pulled him to earth.

Brown and Young’s walked the ball out and, although the angle was
sufficient to allow Yardley to hope for failure, the big tackle sent it
squarely between the posts and the score was tied.

With less than four minutes left, it was fairly obvious that 7 to
7 would be the final score, but Yardley, with three new men in her
line-up, still hoped and returned eagerly to the fray. The kick-off
went to the Orange’s twelve yards and came back only to her fifteen. A
skin-tackle on her right brought her three yards and a second attempt
was stopped. For the first time since the game had started the Orange
players became ugly. Many changes had been made, and possibly it was
a substitute who, charging through, tried to “mix it up” with Bates,
who had succeeded Deering. Friends of both players sprang between and
the Orange youth got off with a warning from the referee. There were
a few hisses, many “boos” and some laughter from the stands. Possibly
the incident supplied the added incentive that allowed Yardley to break
through a moment later and block the adversary’s kick. The ball bounded
from the up-thrown arm of a Yardley lineman and became lost in a mass
of struggling players and for a long moment confusion reigned. When the
referee finally penetrated to the bottom of the squirming, grunting
pile he found the ball snuggled in the arms of a Yardley forward. The
Blue cheered wildly and implored a touchdown as the result became known
to the stands, and, since the teams lined up on the Orange’s fourteen
yards, a touchdown looked possible enough.

But the Blue’s first play resulted disastrously. Clarke, who had
taken Halliday’s place at the right end of the line, was far offside
when the ball was snapped and the team was set back. A plunge at
guard-tackle hole on the left gave Yardley four yards, and Snowden,
from kick formation, managed two more around right end. Then, however,
a forward-pass, Snowden to Bates, went wrong and Fanning dropped back
for a try-at-goal. While both stands grew silent, Will Curran patted
the ground and poised himself on his knees for the pass from center.
The position was at a slight angle and the distance was less than
twenty yards and the Blue already saw victory perched upon her banner.
But Brown and Young’s was desperate and Yardley, perhaps, oversure,
and when the ball came back to Curran so, too, came half the Orange
team, and, although Fanning met the poised ball fairly, it was still
breast-high when the enemy reached it. There was a tragic _thud_ as it
rebounded from an onrushing player, followed by cries and the pounding
of many feet as friend and foe took up the chase. The pursuit passed
over Curran like a wave, leaving him writhing on the sod.

Back to the thirty-yard line trickled the pigskin, and there a Brown
and Young’s tackle scooped it up from under the nose of half a dozen
others and sprang away toward the distant Yardley goal. But although he
started with a clear field, and although hastily-formed interference
grouped itself about him, he was in no condition for speed, and near
the middle of the field Bates, eluding the interference, pulled him to
earth.

Time was taken out for Curran and he limped off, Noyes taking his
place. From midfield, using every trick she knew, the Orange began a
slow advance toward the Blue’s goal. Yardley fought hard but was forced
to yield. Both teams were pretty well tuckered and after each play
substitutes flocked in, and with their arrival the game became more
erratic. Penalties were dealt to each side fairly impartially, signals
were misunderstood and the play became slower and slower, and at last,
with the ball still in Brown and Young’s possession near the home
team’s thirty yards, the whistle sounded the end of the battle.

As unsatisfactory as the outcome was, the teams parted with mutual
respect, and when Brown and Young’s supporters formed into ranks and
marched off the field, cheering mightily, the Blue’s partisans had
no criticism to make. As Grover Beech put it, as he and Toby and Sid
climbed over the barriers and joined the throng beyond, Brown and
Young’s had played a hard, clean game and, on her showing in the last
half, had deserved a victory.

“Which,” observed Sid Creel dryly, “I am pleased to say she didn’t get!”

The Brown and Young’s contest ended Yardley’s preliminary season.
Four games remained, those with Carrel’s, Nordham, St. John’s, and
Broadwood. Two of these, the Carrel’s and St. John’s games were to be
played away from home. All were looked on as hard battles, although
it might well be that none would prove harder than the contest just
played. Brown and Young’s had been underestimated, and it was certain
that another year her place on the Yardley schedule would be much
further along. Still, there were no regrets over that game. Yardley
had showed her faults in time to allow the proper remedies to take
effect, all of her players had come through the grilling without
serious damage and several second and third string players had found
the opportunity to show ability. Will Curran’s injury was slight, it
seemed, and he would be out of the game but a few days. Some over-eager
Brown and Young’s man had trampled over his prostrate form and placed
a heavy foot against his knee, but treatment and an elastic bandage
would repair the damage. On the whole, Yardley Hall School, coach,
players and noncombatants, were rather well satisfied with the recent
engagement, and there was a general verdict to the effect that the Blue
had been extremely fortunate to get through it without a beating.

Arnold was somewhat downhearted for a day or two, maintaining sadly
that the Orange’s score could be blamed on him, and relating the
incident in appalling detail to Toby until the latter youth begged him
to forget it. “No one else expected a forward-pass then,” said Toby,
“so why should you have looked for one? Besides, it was up to Ted
Halliday as much as to you. Cheer up and ease your face, Arn. You still
have me to live for!”

The final argument didn’t seem to make any great appeal to Arnold at
the moment, but by Monday, after a light session on the gridiron, he
returned to his wonted cheerfulness. That Monday witnessed what, to
Toby at least, was a most surprising event. He learned of it after
practice when, returning to Number 12, he found Arnold there before him.

“I suppose you know about the new end we’ve acquired,” said Arnold,
smiling broadly.

“End? No, what do you mean?”

“What! You haven’t missed him? Such is fame! Ain’t it sad?”

“What are you jabbering about?” Toby relaxed on the window-seat with a
sigh of weariness. “Who haven’t I missed?”

“Why, your bosom friend, Mr. Tubbs, of course.”

“Tubb? What about Tubb?” asked Toby suspiciously.

“Then you don’t know! You haven’t heard the glad and glorious news!”

“I have not, but if Tubb has fallen down and bitten his tongue――――”

“Nary a fall down, old thing! Instead, Mr. Tubbs――or is it Tubb?
Anyway, whatever his poetic name may be, he has landed on his feet.”

“Has he?” Toby sounded bored and indifferent. “Well, he’s been in the
air long enough! In just what manner, Mr. Bones, has the gentleman
landed on his feet? Whenever you consider that the suspense has lasted
long enough, Arn, you have my permission to shoot!”

“Prepare to faint, T. Tucker! Your friend Tubbs has been ruthlessly
torn from your arms! He’s taken over to the First!”




CHAPTER XVII

AN “ACCIDENT”


A sense of duty is sometimes a most inconvenient thing to possess. That
Monday night it was a sense of duty that sent Toby up to Number 31,
and he went laggingly, feeling very certain that George Tubb would be
more objectionable than ever. Tubb was not, Toby thought, of the kind
who stands prosperity well. Tubb would be quite unbearable to-night:
Toby could imagine him growling “Huh, I’d have made the First Team long
ago if I’d had the ‘pull’ some fellows have!” But Toby felt that to an
extent he was responsible for Tubb’s well-being, having in a manner
started him out of his Slough of Despond, and that it was up to him to
congratulate the other on his good fortune.

The scene that met his eyes when he pushed the door open in response
to an invitation to enter was very unlike that upon which he had gazed
on the occasion of his first visit to Number 31. Tubb and Ramsey were
shoulder to shoulder, Tubb seated and his roommate bending over the
table beside him, evidently elucidating some problem contained in the
textbook that lay open before them. To all appearances perfect amity
reigned now in Number 31! Nor was that the only surprise awaiting
Toby. George Tubb was still George Tubb, and probably he would never
be anything else, but instead of “grouching” because Fortune had not
visited him earlier, or predicting the great things that were to happen
by reason of his elevation to the First, he seemed loath to talk of
the matter, accepting the visitor’s congratulation with a frown and
a muttered――and vague――“Oh, well, I don’t know. I suppose it’s all
right.” After that he appeared to prefer other topics of conversation,
although Toby nevertheless had the impression that the matter was in
his thoughts most of the time.

The problem in geometry that had puzzled Tubb proved a diversion and
Toby was able to supply the needed assistance, rather to his surprise
since of late he had begun to fear that he had forgotten most of what
he had learned during the preceding year! After that they talked
of various subjects, football most of all. Tubb was ready to talk
football so long as it was general, and he had a number of criticisms
to make of last Saturday’s contest. With some of them Toby didn’t
agree, and arguments followed, and Toby discovered that Tubb could
think things out clearly and state his results quite convincingly
when he wanted to. Horace Ramsey maneuvered the talk around to tennis
finally and asked Toby’s advice about trying for the Tennis Team.

“I didn’t do so badly in the handicaps last week,” he explained. “Got
as far as the semi-finals, anyway. Beat two or three fellows who are
considered rather good, too. How do you set about making the Team,
Tucker?”

Toby didn’t know and said so, but he promised to find out and let
Ramsey know, and after that he took his departure. Both boys, without
saying so in words, managed to convey to him the impression that they
had enjoyed his visit and wanted him to come again. He went downstairs
feeling very well pleased with himself for having performed a
disagreeable duty and a little surprised at finding that it hadn’t been
disagreeable after all! “I guess,” he told himself as he clattered down
the stairs, “a good many disagreeable things are like that. You think
they’re a lot worse than they are.”

The First Team paid a good deal of attention to defense that week, a
branch of football science that had been somewhat neglected by Coach
Lyle in favor of attack, and the Second was called on four afternoons
to aid, the big team working, contrary to custom, quite as hard on
Friday as on any other day. It was on Wednesday that Toby had his first
chance to see Tubb in action with the First. Tubb made his entry in the
middle of a very strenuous second half, relieving Meadows. Sandford,
who had started the season at left end, appeared to be out of the
running. Tubb did well. Toby was rather amazed at the boy’s playing,
and his respect for Grover Beech as a judge of football talent went
up a peg. Beech had called Tubb “a natural-born end,” and, while Toby
had little intimate knowledge of end playing, he thought that Beech
had been quite right. Tubb acted as if he had played football for
several seasons. He appeared to have unlimited confidence――in fact,
his confidence looked almost like effrontery at times――and absolutely
no physical fear, hurling himself into every play he could reach
regardless of consequences. He had a way of keeping in motion every
minute while in the line-up that, although it was rather wearisome to
the spectator, kept his adversary in wholesome fear. And he could run
like a ferret, too, and although he still missed tackles rather too
frequently, he proved a thorn in the side of Toby and his team-mates
when catching punts. Somehow, Tubb was always on hand when the ball had
dropped into Toby’s arms, and if Toby squirmed himself free more than
once it was only because Tubb had yet something to learn of the gentle
art of tackling. Toby found himself a bit proud of George Tubb, quite
as though he was personally accountable for that youth’s attainments!

The Second went through some gruelling work that week, for the most
part assaulting the First’s defenses with every art and artifice at
her command. Time and again the ball was taken away from the First and
handed back to the Second, the coaches demanding that she put it over,
every one, as it seemed, conniving at the First Team’s humiliation.
Perhaps once during a game the First was allowed to show her prowess
in attack, and the rest of the time she was back to the wall with the
Second banging at her center, jabbing her tackles, skirting her ends,
trying every possible means to penetrate her defenses. The result
showed before the end of the week arrived. The First developed a
savage, bitter, every-hand-against-me attitude that worked wonders.
On Thursday she was thrice set her five yards and told to hold the
opponent, and twice she did it, which, considering that both coaches
egged on the Second and tried every device they could think of to make
her attack more effective, was none so bad. Even on Friday, with a hard
game against Carrel’s School looming up on the morrow, the First was
hammered and banged about by the Second, which, having come in for a
good many hard knocks and much rough usage, was in none too gentle a
mood. It was on Friday that an incident occurred which, unimportant in
itself, led to strange results.

Frick was playing quarter on the Second and Tubb had taken the place of
an exhausted Meadows at left end on the First. First, unable to gain
her distance in three downs in midfield, punted and the ball fell to
Frick in front of Second’s goal. Both Tubb and Halliday had got free
and were well under the ball as it arched down the field, but Halliday
fell victim to Deering, leaving Tubb to look after Frick alone. Frick
made the catch a moment before Tubb arrived on the scene and set off
to his right in the hope of skirting the enemy pouring down the middle
of the field. Tubb gave chase, running him off. Frick feinted but Tubb
wasn’t fooled. Had the quarter-back been able to get free soon after
making the catch he might have reeled off a good gain, for the gridiron
to his right was practically unguarded, but Tubb had him so well
blocked that there was no getting by and it was only when the side-line
came dangerously near that Frick made a despairing effort to turn in.
He pulled up suddenly and tried to dash past Tubb, but the First Team
end was quicker than he was. Avoiding the runner’s straight-arm, Tubb
dived and, for once, dived surely. He didn’t have to hold his man after
the tackle, for by that time he had plenty of help, and Frick was
speedily flattened out. On his feet again, Frick was very angry indeed,
and panted insults and threats at Tubb’s retreating back until Beech
silenced him.

Unaware that he had aroused Frick’s wrath, Tubb trotted back to his
position. Two savage attacks on the First Team’s line netted but four
yards and then Stover punted. Tubb was spilled trying to stop the
opposing end and was climbing to his feet when the Second’s stragglers
streamed past. Among them was Frick, for some reason later in getting
down the field than he should have been. Only a few saw what happened
as Frick reached Tubb, for most eyes were fixed on Noyes as he got
under the ball. Toby, however, saw from where he sat on the bench, for
Frick’s performance was of more interest to him than any one’s else,
and just now Toby was wondering why his rival was almost the last in
the pursuit. Tubb, in the act of raising himself from the ground,
did not see Frick’s approach, nor, since he was unsuspecting, would
he have heeded it if he had seen it. Frick had set a course that led
him past the other, and now, as he reached him, he swerved a pace and
brought one heavily-shod foot against Tubb’s ribs just under the left
shoulder. It was as deliberate a thing as Toby had ever seen, and
unconsciously he jumped to his feet with an exclamation of disgust.
Tubb, supported at the moment on his left hand, dropped instantly to
the turf and rolled over on his back, his legs drawn up in pain. Frick
was already well down the field. Toby and Lovett, a substitute end, ran
on together. Tubb was white-faced and gasping, both hands clasped to
his side.

“Some one――kicked me,” he whispered. “I’ll be――all right in a――minute.”

“It was Frick,” exclaimed Lovett indignantly. “I saw it. He ought to
get chucked!”

“Frick!” gasped Tubb wonderingly. “What――for?”

By that time Andy Ryan was there with pail and sponge and Toby and
Lovett went back to the bench, the latter still sputtering.

“He’s a poisonous pup, anyway, Tucker, and I hope Tubb goes after him
and gets him for that!”

“Well, I wouldn’t say much about it,” counseled Toby. “It’ll only make
trouble. It’s between the two of them now. Let them settle it.”

“Sure, it isn’t my funeral,” Lovett agreed, “though I don’t see why
you’re so anxious about Frick. If Mr. Burtis had seen it Frick would be
off for keeps, and you’d have quarter-back cinched, Tucker.”

“Well, I don’t want to cinch it that way, I guess. Besides, it may have
been an accident. I know it didn’t look it, but――――”

“Accident your great-aunt!” jeered the other. “Why, Frick went out of
his way to do it! And he sure took a chance. I’ll give him that much
credit. If any one but you and I had seen it――Good-night, Mr. Frick!”

“Guess he knew every one would be looking the other way. Tubb’s up and
Andy’s taking him off. Hope he didn’t get a broken rib. That was a
fierce wallop he got!”

“I’d hand Roy Frick a fierce wallop if it was me,” growled Lovett.
“I’d hand him about two dozen of ’em!”

Tubb was helped into his sweater and sent back to the gymnasium and the
game went on. Since Frick played the half out at quarter, Toby judged
that none had witnessed the incident save he and Lovett. Toby forgot
it later, for in the last fifteen-minute half he went in on the Second
and had his hands and his mind too full of other things. But that some
one still remembered was evident when Toby got back to his room after
practice. George Tubb had left a note.

    Dear Tucker: If you have time will you come up to my room a
    minute after supper? I want to see you about something. G. W. T.

Toby guessed what the something was and wondered whether he was to be
asked to bear a challenge to Roy Frick! He rather wished that Tubb had
selected some one else to consult, but he went nevertheless, climbing
the second flight in Whitson as soon after supper as he judged Tubb
had returned to Number 31. He found both Tubb and Ramsey at home,
but Horace went out after a few minutes, possibly by request. Tubb,
reflected Toby, was quite a different looking boy from the one whose
cut lip he had plastered on the train that afternoon some five weeks
ago. For one thing, he looked a deal cleaner! And he was rather more
carefully dressed. But the real change was deeper, Toby thought.
Tubb’s attitude toward his fellows and his school life had undergone a
change already, and the end was not yet; and the fact was manifested
in his expression and his speech. Tubb had gained in self-respect,
Toby concluded. Physically, too, he had altered, and for the better,
for football work had straightened his shoulders, made his flesh look
harder and his eyes clearer and removed the unhealthy pallor from his
face. On the whole, Toby got quite a lot of satisfaction from his study
of George W. Tubb this evening.

But it was a very serious Tubb who confronted Toby when the door had
closed behind Horace Ramsey. There was very evidently something on the
Tubb mind. Toby waited in silence and after a moment Tubb began. “That
fellow with you this afternoon――Lovett, wasn’t it?――said it was Frick
who kicked me in the side. Did you see him do it, Tucker?”

“Why――well, yes, I did, Tubb. Of course it was probably an accident――――”

“How could it have been?” Tubb’s old scowl returned for an instant.
“He had the whole field, didn’t he? He needn’t have run over me! No,
I guess what happened was that he got mad because I stopped him from
running the punt back that time. I guess he’s got a bad temper, Frick.
Well, anyway, what I wanted to ask you is this. What’s the right way to
go after him? They say faculty won’t stand for fighting, but of course
a fellow’s got to pull a scrap sometimes. I’m going to get Frick for
this, but I don’t want to get fired, you see. He isn’t worth it.”

“Of course he isn’t,” agreed Toby heartily. “And I’m afraid you would
get――well, maybe not fired, Tubb, but put on probation at least if
faculty found out.”

“And probation would lose me my place on the team, wouldn’t it? That’s
what I supposed. Well, then, how would you go about it, Tucker? So as
not to be nabbed, I mean.”

“Why, I don’t know. Why not――well, why not forget it, Tubb? After all
a fellow who does things like that harms himself more than he does any
one else, and――――”

“Yah!” interrupted Tubb rudely. “Sunday school stuff, Tucker! I’ll bet
you wouldn’t talk that way if it was you who had half a dozen sore ribs
some guy had given you!”

“Well, maybe I wouldn’t,” granted Toby, “but I’d hesitate a long time
before I’d risk probation for the sake of fighting him! And that’s what
you’d better do.”

“Listen here, Tucker,” replied the other earnestly. “I’m going to get
even with that fellow. I didn’t give him any cause to kick my ribs in.
Even if I had, he’d no right to do it when I was down like that. What I
want to know is how you fight a fellow here. I guess there are fights:
I never heard of a school where they didn’t pull ’em off now and then.”
Tubb viewed Toby hopefully.

“Maybe there are,” said Toby, “but I’ve never seen one. I suppose
fellows get off by themselves somewhere sometimes,” he continued
vaguely. “But if faculty hears of it――――”

“Have to risk that,” said Tubb, more cheerfully. He was silent a
moment. Then: “Of course what I wanted to do was wait around at the
gym this afternoon and hand him a few, but I had a hunch that Lyle or
some one would be there and get peeved. So I didn’t. Then this evening
I caught him grinning at me in commons once. That grin’s going to cost
him something, believe me, Tucker!”

“But look here, Tubb,” said Toby practically, “Frick’s two years older
than you, I guess, and he’s bigger and heavier, and fellows say he’s a
scrapper. I don’t know how good you are, but――――” Toby cast a dubious
glance over the other’s rather meager frame――“it’s something to think
about, isn’t it?”

“How long did you think about it when Frick got gay with you down at
the field the other day?” asked Tubb, with a twinkle in his eye.

“Not at all,” answered Toby, smiling. “But then, there wasn’t time!”

“Huh! Well, don’t you worry about me, Tucker. I can handle that big
bully. I’ve had to scrap all my life, pretty near, and I know the
tricks. Besides, I’ve got right on my side, ain’t――haven’t I? And that
counts, doesn’t it?”

“It ought to,” the other agreed, “but I wouldn’t count too much on it.”

“Where does Frick room?” asked Tubb after a moment.

“I don’t know.” Toby frowned a minute. Then: “Look here, Tubb, let’s
talk sense,” he expostulated. “Never mind whether faculty finds out or
doesn’t. You say you’re willing to risk that. But if you beat Frick up
or if he beats you up, Tom Fanning will hear of it, even if the coaches
don’t. And Fanning will drop you from the team like a――a hot potato!”

“I don’t see why he should,” Tubb objected. “It’s not his affair,
Tucker.”

“Why isn’t it? It’s his affair if you or any other fellow on the team
breaks training. If Frick lays you up for a day or two――――”

“Huh! Like to see him do it!”

“Never mind, it’s possible. You’d be a fat lot of use to the team,
wouldn’t you? Well, that’s where it becomes Fan’s business, Tubb. Just
as long as you’re on the team it’s your duty to go by the rules.”

“Is there any rule saying you mustn’t knock a fellow down after he’s
kicked you in the slats?”

“Don’t be a chump! No, there isn’t, but there’s a general rule that
says you must keep yourself in trim so you’ll be able to do your best
for the team and the school. And when you fight another chap you’re
taking chances you haven’t the right to take. Besides, Tubb, there’s
another thing. You’re disturbing the――the――――”

“Well, didn’t Frick disturb the same thing, whatever it is, when he
kicked me this afternoon? Think he helped keep me in trim, like you
say? Well, I don’t!”

“Frick took an awful chance and got away with it, but I don’t think
that’s any reason you should. Hang it, Tubb, you’ve made the First Team
and you’ve got a great chance of playing against Broadwood, and that’s
something a lot of fellows would give their eye-teeth for! Don’t go and
spoil it by having a mix-up with this chap. If you must get even with
him, wait until the football season’s over, anyway. He won’t get away.”

Tubb scowled. “I might forget it by that time,” he objected.

Toby laughed. “All the better then! Take a chance on that, anyhow. Will
you?”

Tubb hesitated, the scowl still lingering. At last: “I might,” he
answered, “I’ll see.” Then, after a moment: “I’d sort of hate to lose
my job with the team, Tucker,” he said frankly, “and that’s a fact. You
could have knocked me flat with a feather when they yanked me onto the
First. I――I guess I talked a lot of rot about ‘pull’ and that sort of
thing, because there wasn’t any pull about my getting on the First, was
there? It was just my playing. Not that I think I’m anything wonderful,
Tucker. Halliday’s better than I am, and maybe Meadows is, too, but I’m
going to beat him out for the place if I bust a leg doing it!”

“That’s the way to talk,” approved Toby warmly. “And if you feel that
way about it, Tubb, I don’t see how you can think of risking your
chance. Why, Frick isn’t worth it!”

“Maybe that’s so,” agreed Tubb thoughtfully. “Just the same, if that
pup looks cross-eyed at me again, or tries to get fresh――――”

“Keep out of his way,” laughed Toby.

“Huh! I guess not! He’d think I was scared of him.”

“Let him. After the Broadwood game you can show him you’re not. That’s
a bargain, then?”

“I don’t promise,” said Tubb, “but as long as he behaves himself I
guess I’ll let him alone. Say, Tucker, I suppose you wouldn’t want
to――to sort of explain to him how it is, eh? So he wouldn’t think he
was getting away with it!”

“Frankly, I would not, Tubb,” answered Toby, smiling. “Just forget all
about him and remember Broadwood. That’s your game!”




CHAPTER XVIII

A QUARTER-BACK RUN


The Second Team had a schedule of its own, although it wasn’t very
lengthy. It consisted of two games, the first with Greenburg High
School and the second with Latimer High School. The Greenburg game came
off the afternoon that the First played Carrel’s, and in consequence
Toby missed the latter contest. He didn’t mind that, however, for he
had a busy and enjoyable time in Greenburg. Besides, he got the full
and detailed story of the Carrel game from Arnold that evening and the
next day and for one or two days after that. Arnold was very full of
football just now and threatened to be somewhat of a bore until the
Broadwood contest was done with!

The Greenburg athletic field lay on the side of town away from the
river and Yardley and was a rather uneven piece of turf enclosed by a
dilapidated high board fence. There was a running track, badly in need
of cinders and attention, two weather-stained stands and an unpainted
shack that did duty as a dressing-room. The game was not very important
from a Greenburg standpoint, and the attendance this afternoon was
not large. Usually Greenburg won from the Yardley Second Team without
much difficulty, and although this fall High School had heard stories
of unusual prowess on the Second Team’s part she was still not much
worried. Being a half holiday at the various mills and factories, of
which Greenburg held many, the “tough” element of the town――or city,
since that is what Greenburg officially was――was well represented.
The mill operatives who had paid their quarters for admittance to the
game were strongly pro-High School in their sympathies. Or perhaps
it would be nearer the truth to say that they were enthusiastically
anti-Yardley. In their belief all Yardley students were silk-stockinged
snobs, which, while far from the fact, was enough to set the mill crowd
against the school. They came supplied with peanuts and, perhaps a
hundred in number, took possession of one of the small, tumble-down
stands and made their presence known right from the start. But aside
from shouting weird cheers for Greenburg, singing, parodying the
Yardley slogan in mincing falsetto and shying an occasional peanut at
the visitors’ bench in front of them, they kept the peace during most
of the game.

Captain Beech wanted to win to-day’s contest, since last year High
School had caught the Blue team in a slump and triumphed decisively
over it by a memorable score of 38 to 6, and so, with Coach Burtis’s
permission, the Second started with the best line-up she could devise.
Mr. Burtis had awarded himself a vacation and gone home over the
week-end, leaving the captain in undisputed authority. Toby didn’t get
into the game until the third period was well along, for Frick, who had
started it, played his best and a touchdown by Yardley in the first
five minutes of play gave the visitors an advantage that the home team
was not able to overcome in the initial half. The Blue defense was
too much for the High School eleven although the latter had plenty of
talent in its ranks and played a stiff, hard attack. On the other hand,
Yardley had her troubles with the High School line, and that single
touchdown had been more than half luck. A fortunate forward pass from
the middle of the field had put the Blue within striking distance of
High School’s goal and a penalty for holding had given her five yards
more. Then Frick had fumbled and Nelson had followed the trickling ball
back, and, having captured it, found a chance around High School’s
left. He should have been stopped half a dozen times, but somehow he
sifted through the enemy ranks and landed the pigskin up against the
left-hand post before he was brought down.

High School accepted her mishap cheerfully and set to work to do a
little scoring on her own behalf, but the half ended without the
ball’s having approached either goal again. The second half was eight
minutes old when Captain Beech found that Frick’s work was becoming
slow and uncertain and sent him off. High School had forced the ball
to Yardley’s thirty-one yards and still had possession when Toby went
in. He was followed a minute later by Lovett, who was called on to
strengthen the right end of the Blue’s line, around which High School
had made several gains since the period had begun. Lovett, however,
proved no more able to stop those gains than had Connell, and High
School swept on to the Blue’s twenty-yard-line in three plays and set
her supporters shouting triumphantly. With the cheers of the High
School students came approving yells from the mill contingent; hoarse
cries of “Eat ’em up, Greenburg!” “Kill the sissies!” “Put it over,
Greenburg!” Then, with a score almost won, the High School left end
was caught hugging Stover affectionately to his breast, and High
School was set back fifteen yards. The mill hands didn’t approve of
that and made it known loudly and continuously, hissing and whistling
and hurling sarcastic remarks at the referee. After two plays which
netted only short gains, High School tried a drop-kick from her thirty
yards and failed badly.

The mill operatives still had hurt feelings and were now howling
continuously. The referee was accused of favoritism, treachery and
several other faults, and Yardley of being “pikers” and “yellow dogs.”
Matters became no more peaceful when Toby, getting the kick-off just
short of his five-yard-line, dodged it back to his twenty-three. Watson
went in for Sid Creel at center a minute or two later and Toby began
a systematic assault on High School’s middle positions. Stover gained
consistently and White ploughed through less frequently but for longer
gains. High School changed center and left guard and Toby switched his
attack to the right guard and tackle. There, however, he had less luck,
and, well into High School territory now, he called for a forward, and
White, from kicking position, threw successfully to Mawson on High
School’s nineteen, a long hard heave that brought applause even from
the enemy. Mawson reached the sixteen yards before he was tackled and
the fourteen before he was stopped.

The third period ended and the teams changed sides. High School fought
desperately to hold her opponent and the attack was thrice piled up for
little or no gain. Choosing between the possible loss of the ball and a
possible three points from a field-goal, Toby selected the latter and
Beech went back for the kick. But High School tore through the Yardley
left and blocked the ball sufficiently to deflect it harmlessly to the
right. That incident gladdened the mill hands considerably and they
cheered hoarsely.

High School tried a forward-pass on first down and got away with it
for twelve yards. Plunges at the line netted her a second first down.
Three subsequent attacks left her four yards shy of her distance and
she punted to Yardley’s thirty. There Stover caught and ran back to
the thirty-seven. He was hurt in the tackle and gave place to Lippman.
Toby tried a quarter-back run after a delayed pass and made a scanty
five yards after going half across the field. High School held against
two plunges and White punted outside at the enemy’s twenty-eight.
High School uncorked a puzzling open formation play that sent the
full-back around her short end without interference and almost got him
free. But Lippman secured the runner after a fifteen-yard advance. A
forward-pass went wrong and, after attempting each end, High School
punted. Lippman juggled the catch, recovered it and was downed for no
gain on his twenty yards. Toby called on White and made seven straight
through High School’s center, and Lippman went outside right tackle
for four more and the distance. Then, with the end of the game drawing
near, Lippman punted on second down from his thirty to High School’s
thirty-eight. Again the latter tried her open formation play, but this
time Yardley was prepared and the runner was downed for an eight-yard
loss. A forward-pass gave High School ten and a wide end run two more.
Then came Waterloo, for a High School back, plunging toward the Yardley
right tackle, lost the pigskin as he struck the line and the ball
bounded merrily into the air, crossed the heaving lines and was pulled
down by Nelson.

The best the Blue’s left half could do was hold tight to his prize,
for half the opposing team was on top of him in the moment. But it was
Yardley’s ball on High School’s forty-nine yards, and, with less than
two minutes remaining, the game was as good as won. Captain Beech ran
in four substitutes, about all he had left, and on the first play, one
of them, Crawford, at full-back, went through the Greenburg line like a
streak of lightning and dodged all but the quarter-back, planting the
ball on High School’s thirty-two yards when he was captured. A penalty
for off-side on the next play set Yardley back, but Lippman carried the
pigskin around left end for three and Crawford made three more, and,
on fourth down, faking a kick from placement, Toby took the ball and
scampered off around the Greenburg right behind good interference and
might have crossed the goal line had he not, as he put it later, fallen
over his own feet! The stumble allowed a pursuing High School player to
drag him down six yards short of the last white streak.

Then came a heart-stirring climax to a contest that had never failed
of interest. The stands had emptied ere this and the audience had been
following the game along the side-lines. Now it congregated at the
corner of the field nearest the play, flowing over onto the gridiron
in spite of the efforts of a few ineffectual officials. In the front
of the throng were the mill operatives, noisy and unfriendly to the
besiegers, more than willing, it seemed, to take a hand in the game.
Toby and Grover Beech consulted while the crowd jeered and hooted.
Toby wanted to try a forward-pass over the line, but Captain Beech
was fearful of it save as a last resort, and it was decided to batter
the opponent’s line so long as gains resulted and then, faking a
try-at-goal, attempt a short pass over the center.

Toby called on Crawford and sent him banging at the enemy’s
guard-tackle hole on the left. But the hole didn’t develop and the gain
was less than a yard. Beech sent Crawford out and brought in Lansing,
a heavy youngster whose slowness had kept him on the bench most of the
season. The unfriendly critics, edging over the bounds, made scurrilous
remarks anent Lansing’s personal appearance and had that poor youth,
already made nervous by the honor so unexpectedly thrust upon him, a
mass of blushes by the time he was in position. But blushes didn’t take
away from Lansing’s weight or strength, and, with Lippman carrying the
pigskin, Lansing thrust the runner through for three of the remaining
five yards. There was some rough playing in that fracas, and Toby
discovered that he had sustained a very ensanguined nose. On third
down, with just over two yards to go, Lippman tried a cross-buck and
squirmed over the crouched backs of the foe for another three feet,
amidst an appalling shouting from the belligerent onlookers. The mill
contingent was now so close behind the defenders that it was hard to
tell who was a player and who a spectator, and Captain Beech called
for time and pointed out the fact. The Greenburg players tried to push
the throng back, but, although it good-naturedly shuffled a few yards
away, it pressed forward once more as soon as the teams again lined up.
The referee and umpire scolded and threatened to call the game, but
were only hooted at. To the credit of the High School students present
it may be said that they did nothing to encourage the mill hands and
themselves remained, if not outside the field, at least away from the
scene of play. In the end, finding pleas and threats alike idle, the
referee let the game go on.

“We’ll never score against that mob,” whispered Beech disgustedly to
Toby. “They’ll jump in and push us back. Might as well call it off. I
don’t want any mix-up with those muckers!”

Toby nodded agreement, viewing the grinning, inimical countenances
grouped behind the opposing line thoughtfully. Then: “Let me work this,
cap, will you? I think there’s just one chance!”

“Go ahead,” said Beech, “but you’ll never make a forward with that gang
back there to get in the way.”

“No, a forward’s no good, but――Signals! Come on now, Yardley! One more
punch! Signals! 31――51――27――――”

“_Signals!_” cried Lippman wildly, questioningly.

“Shut up!” hissed Toby. “Change signals! 61――54――27――9! 61――54――――”

Forward plunged the backs, away sped Toby, scuttling along the back of
the short line, the ball snuggled in his elbow. Cries and grunts and
the rasping of canvas-clad bodies filled the air. Then a shriek from an
excited, despairing high school spectator: “_There he goes! Get him,
you mutts!_”

The play had been close to the left-hand corner of the field and the
onlookers had crowded there, along the side-line for a short distance,
but principally back of the goal-line. At the other side of the goal,
save for a sprinkling of High School girls and their escorts, the field
was clear. Toward this side of the gridiron sped Toby. Only Lovett,
throwing his opponent in as he plunged through, went with him. But the
right end was sufficient. A Greenburg back met him and the two sprawled
to the turf together, and Toby, turning on his heel, headed swiftly
in. A yard or two short of the line he dodged the only remaining
opposition, a despairing High School quarter, and circled back toward
the goal. But now there were plenty to challenge. A High School player
clutched at him and missed and then Toby found himself in a struggling
sea of angry mill operatives. Farquhar tried to reach him, but was
pushed aside, and a dozen hands fought for the ball. Toby clung to it
as tightly as he could and sought to fight his way forward, but the
crowd was ugly. Some one struck him on the mouth and, as his head went
back, the ball was dislodged. The yells about him merged in a laugh of
triumph and, shoved aside, he sank to the ground, while the mill crowd
went piling off toward the entrance, the ball in their possession. None
tried to stop them.

The officials allowed the touchdown, but Captain Beech, helping a
battered Toby to his feet, declined the privilege of trying goal
with another ball. “Had enough, thanks,” he said coldly. Then, to an
apologetic and regretful Greenburg Captain: “This is the last game you
fellows will get with us, Townsend. Come on, Yardley! Never mind the
cheer!”

Toby was not the only one of the visiting team who had sustained a
memento of that closing minute. Three other fellows who had sought to
reach him had been punched, or kicked, and, including such slighter
injuries as had fallen to the Yardley Second during the game, it was a
somewhat messed up aggregation that journeyed back to Wissining that
afternoon. The last they saw of the mill hands they were having a
remarkable football game with the stolen ball in the road outside the
field, too busy to more than hoot at the visitors as they passed.

“I’d like to fetch a couple of dozen more fellows down here and wipe
the ground up with them,” muttered Beech. “Bet you that’s our last game
with Greenburg for awhile, Toby.”

Toby didn’t offer to accept the wager, which was fortunate for his
modest resources since, a few days later, the Yardley faculty, having
probed the incident, struck Greenburg High School from the list of
approved opponents.




CHAPTER XIX

ARNOLD HAS A THOUGHT


The First Team came back hard that afternoon, rolling up a total of 25
points against Carrel’s and holding the opponent to a single touchdown.
Yardley scored in each period, starting in the first with a field-goal
shortly after play began, adding a touchdown and goal in the second,
a touchdown in the third and another field-goal and touchdown in the
last. Carrel’s did her scoring in the third period, following a fumble
in the back-field by Quarterback Noyes. Securing the ball on Yardley’s
twenty-two yards, the visitor worked a double pass that sent her
full-back romping over the line without much opposition. She failed at
an easy goal, however, and had to be content with six points.

Of course Toby heard all this and much more from Arnold that evening,
for Arnold was as full of the game’s details as a plum-pudding is full
of raisins――or ought to be! But it was after Toby had sketched the
Second Team’s fracas with the mill hands, for Toby’s face demanded an
explanation. Besides a contused nose, honestly earned in combat, he
had a large lump on his left cheek bone. “Some day, maybe,” he said
wistfully, “I’m going to meet up with the fellow who handed me that.
When I do, if it isn’t in church, I’m going to hand it back to him.”

“Think you’d know him?” asked Arnold. “Thought you said it was a mob,
and that――――”

“It was a mob, but I saw the chap that walloped me. Yes, I’ll know him
all right if only by his hair.”

“What about his hair?”

“It was――――” Toby hesitated――“it was red!”

Arnold whooped delightedly. “What do you know? Honest, Toby? Say, I’d
like to have seen that! Red against――hm――――”

“Say it,” said Toby, grinning. “His was redder than mine, too, and
that’s going some! And he had freckles all over his nose and looked
like one of those tough boys in the movies. Yes, I’ll know him. Don’t
you worry.”

“Well, you’d better bathe that lump he gave you. It makes you look
sort of lopsided. In fact, T. Tucker, that and your nose give you
a positively villainous appearance! Frank’s got a hard-looking phiz
to-night, too. Some one put a foot on it, he says. I told him he should
be more careful and not leave his face lying around on the ground, but
it didn’t seem to make a hit with him. Some folks are like that; can’t
take advice for a cent. Say, Toby, old thing, it was some game. Listen!
They won the toss and gave us the kick-off and Larry――――”

Arnold had started, and Toby laid back on the window-seat and hugged
his knees and said “Uh-huh” at intervals and listened as attentively as
he could. But presently he got to thinking about his morrow’s letter
home, and then about that scholarship after the mid-year, and was
yanked back to the present by Arnold’s: “Isn’t that the very dickens,
Toby?”

“Huh? Oh, yes, mighty tough! Who did you say did it?”

“I don’t know who did it! What do you mean, did it? It was the hurt he
got in the Brown and Young’s game, I tell you. They thought it was all
right, and they took the bandage off and everything, and then to-day he
just gave it a twist or something!”

“Who did?”

“Why, Curran! Say, haven’t you heard anything I’ve been saying?”

“Of course! But you talk so fast! As I understand it, Curran got hurt
in last Saturday’s game and to-day he twisted his ankle――――”

“It’s his knee, you idiot!”

“I meant knee; and had to quit playing. Who went in for him?”

“Errol Noyes. He did well enough except for a fumble that gave them
their score. If it hadn’t been for that we’d have――――”

“Fumbles will happen in the best regulated back-fields,” murmured Toby.
“I think Noyes is pretty good, myself.”

“I’m not saying he isn’t,” answered Arnold impatiently, “but,
man-alive, he isn’t in Will’s class! And if Will doesn’t get back――――”

“Doesn’t get back! Who says he won’t get back?”

“That’s what Fanning thinks. He’s all cut-up about it. They’re going to
take an X-ray to-morrow. The doc thinks he will have to keep off it for
a month.”

“Gee, that is tough! I didn’t realize what you meant! Of course, Noyes
isn’t the player that Curran is, but he’s pretty good. Who else have
you got?”

“Winfield, but he’s no earthly use.” Arnold was gloomily silent for a
moment. Then he gave vent to an explosive: “_By jingo, Toby!_”

“What?” Toby brought a startled gaze back from the darkening world
outside the window. Arnold was staring at him fixedly.

“Nothing,” answered Arnold slowly. But he kept on staring in a curious,
rapt way until Toby said in a patient, kindly voice: “It’s all right,
Arn. It’s me, Toby. I room here with you, you know. That’s my bed over
there. Don’t you remember me? Try to think, Arn!”

“Shut up,” laughed the other. “I――I just thought of something.”

“Try to forget it then,” Toby advised. “You looked like a sick cow.
Say, you――you didn’t get a blow on the head this afternoon, did you?
Sometimes an injury of that sort――But no, it wouldn’t affect you that
way. That dome of yours would just give forth a hollow sound――――”

“Listen,” interrupted Arnold earnestly. “If Curran _is_ out of the game
for the rest of the season, why, don’t you see what might happen?”

“Yes, we might get licked by Broadwood. Still, we may anyhow, so what’s
the good of――――”

“Oh, use your bean! We’ll have to find a substitute for Noyes, of
course! Maybe Mr. Lyle will try Clarke. Sim’s not much of an end, and
he played quarter some last year. But then again he might go to the
Second for what he needs.”

“Who, Clarke?”

“No, Mr. Lyle, you ninny. And if he did he might pick you, T. Tucker!”

“Yes, and he might not,” jeered Toby. “Frick’s got first call, you poor
old dummy.”

“I’m not so sure! I’ve heard that you were doing just as good work as
Frick, Toby.”

“Oh, you hear a lot of things if you let your ears flap,” answered Toby
rudely.

“The idea doesn’t interest you, then?” asked Arnold sarcastically.

“I wouldn’t say that,” Toby replied, getting a new grip on his knees.
“I have a comprehensive intellect, Arn, and all sorts of things that
wouldn’t appeal to ordinary minds――――”

“Oh, go to thunder! I hope Frick does get it, you poor fish!”

“May the best man win,” said Toby cheerfully. “Them’s my sentiments.
Come on. Let’s eat.”

By Monday it was pretty generally known that Will Curran was lost
to the football team for the rest of the season. The injury to his
knee sustained in the Brown and Young’s game had proved far more
serious than at first supposed and an X-ray examination had shown
that a cast was necessary. To be sure, the Greenburg surgeon, called
into consultation by the school doctor, spoke vaguely of “benefits
reasonably to be expected from a fortnight’s care,” but no one was
fooled, least of all Curran. By the middle of the week he was out on
crutches, but he was there to help in the coaching of the backs and not
to play. The blow was a sore one to the school, and for several days
gloom a foot thick hung over it. Then, since Coach Lyle went on about
his business of developing a winning football team quite as cheerfully
and whole-heartedly as ever, and since Errol Noyes buckled down and
worked like a Trojan to fill Curran’s shoes, the gloom thinned out and
vanished altogether. After all, the reports from Broadwood were far
from disheartening: not the newspaper stuff written by the Broadwood
correspondents, but the underground rumors that percolated somehow from
the rival school through Greenburg and thence up the hill to Yardley.
Broadwood was but three miles beyond Greenburg, and since her students
came to that town for purchases and amusement, just as Yardley fellows
did, stories were bound to leak out. The local rumors just now had it
that Broadwood was having much difficulty in filling her back-field
with the right material. In fact, the rumors were borne out by the
evidence of the last two contests in which the Green had taken part.
For Broadwood to be defeated by Franklin was something unheard of and
unthought of, but that had happened two weeks since. And last Saturday,
in the Nordham game, she had managed to squeeze through to victory
by a mere seven points. So, as the more optimistic of the Yardley
enthusiasts pointed out, even the loss of Curran was not sufficient
cause for conceding a Broadwood victory.

Coach Lyle did as Arnold had surmised he might do. He took Sim Clarke
from the ranks of the end substitutes and turned him back into a
quarter, and it was generally allowed that, with Curran coaching him,
Sim might develop into a valuable player. Meanwhile, Noyes worked
fairly satisfactorily. Indeed, in the Nordham game the next Saturday
he ran the team so well that even Tom Fanning took heart and stopped
predicting to a few close friends――comprising most of the team!――a
victory for the rival school. Toby heard from Sid Creel that Roy
Frick was so certain of being taken to the First that he had tried
to persuade Phil Stone to give him the First Team signal code! That,
Frick had explained, was so he could take hold without loss of time.
Toby had not put much value on Arnold’s suggestion that one T. Tucker
might be elevated to the varsity ranks and consequently was not at all
disappointed.

The Second took a beating every time it went against the First
nowadays, for the latter was fast rounding into late season form. Now
and again it managed to throw a scare into Coach Lyle’s bunch, but
that is the best it could do. Ordinarily, if it kept the First to two
scores, or managed to score itself, it swaggered quite sickeningly.
Toby and Frick still struggled for supremacy, with little to choose
between them, it seemed. Frick undoubtedly excelled Toby in individual
work, being surer in tackling and in running with the ball. On the
other hand, Toby was rather more steady when it came to catching punts
and could get more out of the team. Perhaps the latter ability was due
to the fact that he was far better liked than Frick.

The Yardley-Nordham game was uninteresting save as it gave the Blue
a chance to study comparative scores. Nordham played a listless
game, partly owing to the absence of three players who had been hurt
in the Broadwood contest, and, although she twice managed to hold
Yardley under her goal-posts, she proved an easy victim, the home team
winning by a score of 19 to 0. Compared to Broadwood’s 7 to 0 victory,
this looked pretty good until one recalled that Nordham was lacking
three regulars and was evidently still feeling the effects of last
week’s contest. Coach Lyle worked in most of his second-string and
third-string players in the last period. If he hadn’t, there might have
been another score to Yardley’s credit. The cheering section kept very
busy that afternoon, trying out several new songs and rehearsing all
the old ones in preparation for the big game, in spite of the fact that
a mean, dispiriting drizzle fell all during the last half. Clarke got a
chance to show what he had for a few minutes in the fourth period and
gave the impression of having very little. But as he had been at it
less than a week it was hardly fair to judge him harshly.

So, with only one minor game remaining, Yardley set her face hopefully
toward the supreme test two weeks hence.




CHAPTER XX

AN ENCOUNTER ON THE BEACH


“Doing anything this afternoon, Tucker?”

George Tubb paused with a foot on the stairs to the third floor
of Whitson and put the question with elaborate carelessness. Toby
hesitated the fraction of a moment. He knew whither the inquiry led
and he wanted to answer in the affirmative, but he really wasn’t doing
anything special, and Arnold could never be counted on for Sunday
afternoon entertainment, and so he said, after a scarcely noticeable
pause: “Why, no, I guess not, Tubb.”

“Wondered if you’d care to take a walk somewhere,” continued the other,
hurriedly. “It’s a corking day and――and everything.”

“All right. About three? I’ve got a letter to finish.”

“Any time.” Tubb’s tone held perfect indifference. Toby felt as if he
had made the proposal himself and as if Tubb were doing him a favor!
For an instant he was riled and had something tart on the end of his
tongue. But he kept it there, and only said: “Three then. So long!”

Tubb’s feet pounded on up the stairs and Toby pushed open the door of
Number 12. Inside, his slight frown vanished and he chuckled. “Silly
chump!” he murmured. “Afraid I’d guess how much he wanted me to go with
him. Gee, I wonder why! I’m never more than fairly decent to him. Must
be my――my fatal beauty that attracts him!” And Toby’s chuckle grew into
a laugh as he caught sight of his smiling but unclassic features in the
mirror over Arnold’s dresser.

The trouble with writing letters after a Sunday dinner is that a Sunday
dinner is likely to be a rather hearty affair, affecting not only the
body with torpidity but the brain as well. So it was that while the
first three pages of Toby’s weekly epistle were brilliant enough the
last page fell off badly in interest. In fact, he only reached the
bottom of it by desperate effort and by shortening the lines. Then,
when he had thumped a stamp on the corner of the envelope and found cap
and sweater, he clattered down and dropped the letter in the mail-box
in front of Oxford. After that he backed away to the edge of the
Prospect, as the grassy terrace in front of the buildings was called,
fixed his gaze on the window of Number 31 and hailed.

“O Tubb! A-ay, Tubb!”

After several seconds had elapsed, Tubb’s face appeared in the open
window and he looked down at Toby with simulated surprise. Then, as
he looked, recollection dawned, and, “Oh! All right, Tucker! Be right
down!” he called.

Toby kicked at a pebble. “Serve him right if I beat it,” he muttered
vexedly. “Cheeky beggar! Still, he did it pretty well.” Unwilling
admiration softened his rancor, and, “I’ll wait,” he added to himself.

Tubb clattered out of the entrance by the time that resolution of
clemency had been reached and the two crossed the Prospect as if by
mutual consent and took the graveled path that descended the terrace
until it reached the winding road at the foot of the hill. Then, “Which
way?” asked Toby.

“I don’t care,” answered Tubb. “It’s warmer along the beach, I guess.
The wind’s sort of west to-day.”

“About northwest by north,” said Toby, to whom the direction of the
wind and the look of the sky were matters of real interest. “It will
be good and cold to-night, I guess.”

They crossed the road and went on by the path, over the deep cut
through which the shining rails of the double tracks ran. Westward,
they could follow the straight roadway to the Wissining station and the
drawbridge beyond, eastward the railway vanished presently around a
curve. A rod or two further on the path led into the woods, dividing,
and they followed the right-hand trail. The oaks and beeches still held
most of their leaves, but the other trees had stripped their branches
for the winter, and underfoot the colorful litter rustled pleasantly.
A moment later the Sound showed through the trees, softly blue in the
afternoon sunlight. There wasn’t much talk until the two boys had
reached the beach and turned eastward along the firm, hard sand. The
tide was well out, and just above the little ripples of waves gleaming
expanses of wet sand caught the sun blindingly. They by no means had
the beach to themselves, for the mild afternoon had brought out many
of the villagers and not a few of the school fellows, and, looking
ahead down the gently-curving strand, they could see many darker specks
against its golden surface. Out on the water a few pleasure craft
were flitting under a light but steady breeze and Plum Island looked
startlingly near.

“A peach of a day,” said Toby, breathing in the familiar scent of
sea and shore, and experiencing a tiny qualm of homesickness. Tubb
assented. He was looking fixedly at two boys who were approaching them
along the beach. A moment later he grunted.

“There comes Frick,” he said. “Guess I’ll ask him something.”

“No, you won’t,” said Toby decisively. “You promised to behave
yourself.”

“I didn’t promise,” denied Tubb. “I said maybe I’d――Anyhow, I’m not
going to _do_ anything; I just want to let him understand――――”

“You keep your mouth closed, Tubb.” Toby took his arm tightly. “No
nonsense now!”

“We-ell――――” Tubb eyed the approaching couple irresolutely. Frick’s
companion was a stranger to both, a chap whose name Toby believed to be
Cotting, a tall, lanky youth with a wide mouth and outstanding ears.
Just now he appeared to be intensely amused at something Frick was
saying, and his high-pitched laughter, accompanied by surreptitious
glances at Toby and George, was too much for the latter. Wresting his
arm from Toby’s restraining clutch, Tubb swung off to meet the others,
who were passing a dozen yards up the beach. Toby followed more slowly,
thinking unflattering things of Tubb.

“Talking about me, were you?” challenged Tubb from a few paces away.
Cotting shot a startled and questioning glance at Frick. Evidently
Cotting had no desire for trouble. Frick, however, pushed forward
swaggeringly.

“What if I was?” he demanded, scowling.

“Don’t do it!” Tubb’s voice had an unsuspected edge, and Frick stared
an instant in surprise.

“Calm yourself, kid, calm yourself,” he laughed finally. “I talk about
any one I like to. Then what?”

Toby “butted in” at that moment, nodding coldly to Frick and joining
arms with Tubb again. “Come on, Tubb, let’s hurry,” he urged.

“That’s right, Tucker,” said Frick approvingly. “He might get hurt if
he stays around here.”

Cotting had stopped a pace or two away and was digging a hole in the
sand with the toe of one shoe in a very absorbed way. Toby found time
to be amused at his tactful withdrawal.

“I’m not going to get hurt,” responded Tubb. “Don’t worry about me,
Frick. And I’m not going to hurt you――to-day. I just stopped to tell
you that I’m keeping my affair till later on. Didn’t want you to think
you were getting away with what you did last week, because you’re not.
It’s chalked up against you and you’ll get what’s coming to you when
it’s time. There’s no hurry――――”

“Shut up, Tubb,” begged Toby. “Come on!”

“Mind your own business, Tucker!” snarled Frick. “You’re a nice one
to talk that stuff! I’ve got something for you, too, you swell-headed
little carrot! As for you, Tubb, or whatever your silly name is, I’m
ready whenever you are! Right now if you like! I’ll take on the two of
you! Come on! What do you say?”

“There’s going to be no scrapping here,” said Toby resolutely. “There’s
going to be none anywhere for awhile. You keep what you’ve got for me,
Frick. I’ll ask for it when I’m ready. Tubb, you――――”

“You’ll get it when _I’m_, ready!” growled Frick. “I’d give it to
you now if――――” He glanced over the beach and, furtively, toward the
school, whose upper windows were visible above the stretch of woods.

“Yes, and get thrown out of school,” assented Toby grimly. “Not for
me, thanks! There’s time enough. Come on, Tubb.”

“All right,” Tubb smiled cheerfully. “No use getting in trouble about
this guy. See you again, Frick. Be good to yourself!”

“Yes, run along, little boys,” answered Frick, laughing angrily. “For a
plugged nickel I’d bang your fool heads together!”

Toby tightened his hold on Tubb’s arm, but Tubb only laughed and went
on. “Gee, that did me a lot of good,” he said contentedly. “He’s a big
bluff, I guess, Tucker.”

“Maybe. Still, they say he’s pretty handy with his fists. Anyhow, I’m
glad you’re out of that, Tubb. We’d all been finished for fair if you
two had scrapped here on Sunday afternoon!”

“I forgot about its being Sunday,” said Tubb. “I suppose that would
have made it worse. Say, he’s got it in for you, too, hasn’t he?”

“Yes, I guess so,” answered Toby tranquilly. “But I should feel faint!
Anyhow, he will have to keep the peace until football’s over. I don’t
intend to lose my place on the Second for the likes of him!”

“Say, why doesn’t that ninny take you over to the First?” asked Tubb.

“Meaning Mr. Lyle? You have pretty names for your Big Boss! Well, I’ve
been thinking about that, Tubb, and I’ve just about concluded that it’s
because he doesn’t want me!”

“But, joking aside,” protested the other earnestly, “you play a better
game than that guy Clarke, and I’ll bet you could beat Noyes, too, if
you had a chance. Noyes is scared all the time. He gets his signals all
balled up. No one feels any――whatyoucallit――any――any――――”

“You mean that he doesn’t inspire his team with confidence in his
ability to――er――meet successfully the――――”

“Say, what’s wrong with you?” demanded Tubb anxiously.

Toby chuckled. “That’s what comes of trying to make practical
application of what I’ve learned in my English course. Just as soon as
I try to speak the language correctly some one jumps on me! It’s no
use!”

“I should say not!” agreed Tubb, relievedly. “You talk like an
examination paper!”

“Then I’ll stop. Those are things I don’t want to think of. By the way,
how are you getting along in your classes, Tubb?”

“Fine. I never had much trouble with studies. Guess I learn easily.”

“I think you must,” responded Toby thoughtfully. “Wish I did. Shall we
turn back?”

“Do you mean that you have trouble with your studies, Tucker?” asked
Tubb when they were retracing their steps. “I thought you were a
regular shark for work.”

“A shark,” answered Toby, “is a much misunderstood fish. Most folks
think that a shark swallows things whole, but he doesn’t. He has to
bite off a chunk at a time, just as I do. Where we differ, Mister Shark
and I, is on chewing. He doesn’t have to chew what he bites off, and
I do. I have to chew it a long while. And even then it isn’t always
digested. I guess, Tubb, the truth of the matter is that I can learn
easily enough if I set out to do it, but I have a rotten fashion of
trying to do two hours’ study in one!”

Tubb laughed. “I know. If the instructor’s easy you can get by that way
sometimes, but here at Yardley you can’t. I found that out the first
week. Well, I suppose we’ve got to learn the dreary stuff, eh? What’s
the good of it, though? A lot of it, I mean?”

“Don’t know, Tubb. I’ve wondered. Seems to me sometimes that if
they’d teach us less Greek and Latin and higher mathematics and more
things like horseshoeing and plumbing and――and ditch-digging we’d have
a better chance when we got through. A lot of us will never get to
college. I hope to, but I don’t know. If I don’t, what use to me is
Latin and trigonometry and Greek? I suppose I’ll build boats most of my
life――maybe. Being able to read the Odyssey in the original odiousness
isn’t going to help me a whole lot!”

“Well, there are schools where a fellow can go and learn those things,”
said Tubb. “Blacksmithing and electricity and――and practical things,
you know.”

“Yes, but why not teach a little of them at every school? Seems to me
a lot of us would be a sight better off if we knew something about a
practical trade when we got out of prep school. Of course, we couldn’t
learn much, but we might have a start. I guess it’ll come to that some
day, Tubb.”

“Really? Well, I wouldn’t mind. I don’t know what I’m going to do when
I get through here. Go home and tend store, I guess.”

“Store? What kind of a store is it?”

“Oh, just a regular general store like you find in small towns. Dad
sells everything from sugar to plows. And he makes just enough to
live on, I guess. He used to be in the lumber business, and he did
pretty well for awhile. Then――something happened and it went bust. No,
by jiminy, I won’t do it, Tucker! Running a country store isn’t good
enough! I’ll be a――a lawyer or something first!”

“Sounds desperate the way you say it,” laughed Toby. “I’d sort of like
to be a doctor myself, only you can’t be President if you’re a doctor,
and of course I’d rather be President.”

“Can’t you?” asked Tubb innocently. “Why not?”

“Don’t know.” Toby shook his head. “You never heard of a President
who’d been a doctor first, did you? Maybe there’s something in the
Constitution prohibiting it.”

“You say the craziest things!” laughed Tubb. Then, soberly: “Do you
mean that you really think about things like that, Tucker?” he asked.

“Things like what? Being a doctor?”

“No, being President. I never do.”

“Sure, why not? Some one’s got to be President, Tubb. Might as well be
me if I’m fitted for it. Or you, if you are! Every President was a kid
once, you know. I wonder if they ever thought about it when they were
kids. Maybe you’re not supposed to. Anyway, if you’re a lawyer and I’m
a doctor, you’ll get the presidency, because lawyers seem to have it
all over every other profession when it comes to copping that job!”

Later, climbing the hill again, Toby asked: “Changed your mind any
about this place, Tubb?”

“How do you mean?” But, in spite of assumed ignorance, he understood,
and in the next breath he went on. “Yes, I have, Tucker,” he said
frankly. “I said a lot of things I didn’t believe, anyhow. I had an
awful grouch at first. Guess you――guess you must have thought I was a
perfect blamed nuisance!”

“N-no, not exactly. You got me riled pretty often, though.”

“Did I? I suppose I must have. Well――――” Tubb hesitated. “Say, I want
you to know that I appreciate everything, Tucker; everything you did
to make me――make me get onto myself. Of course I know that I’m not the
sort of fellow that other fellows take to, but――but I’ve been――sort
of――getting along lately. Football’s done it, I guess, and you started
me on that. That’s why I say that I’d like you to know――――”

“All right.” Toby chuckled. “Tubb, I decided a long while ago that when
you got straightened out here I was going to do something to prove to
my own satisfaction that――well, that you were a regular fellow.”

“What was it?” asked the other, puzzled.

“I was going to call you something,” answered Toby gravely. “I guess
you have got straightened out pretty well and so I guess I’ll do it
right now.” They had reached the second floor of Whitson and Toby had
started toward Number 12. “See you later, Wash-Tub!”

Then his door closed behind him hurriedly. But George Tubb, continuing
his way upstairs after a moment, looked anything but vengeful!




CHAPTER XXI

TUBB BARKS A KNUCKLE


Yardley entered the final stage of football that week with its
customary enthusiasm and single-mindedness. There had been already two
or three meetings in Assembly Hall, on the third floor of Oxford, for
the purpose of practicing cheers and songs, but those gatherings paled
into insignificance with Monday night’s affair and kept on paling as
the last fortnight before the Broadwood game grew toward its end. There
were mass meetings on Monday, Wednesday and Friday of that next to the
last week, and at each successive meeting the cheering was heartier,
the singing louder and the enthusiasm more intense. Every one who had
anything to say――and some who hadn’t――addressed the students, the
Musical Clubs played their best and if fervor counted in the final
score, Broadwood, to quote Sid Creel, was “a gone coon!”

And on the two gridirons life was very strenuous indeed those six days.
The First was looking toward the big game and nothing else, and the
game with St. John’s Academy, which, contrary to custom, was to be
played away from home, was viewed merely as an incident. New plays,
not many in number but exacting of execution, which had purposely been
held back until now, were being learned and the final touches were
being laid on. Coach Lyle had two graduates to aid him during the last
fortnight, and he needed them, for there were still weak spots in the
Blue’s line-up.

The Second Team, too, went through a week of intensive work, both with
a view to giving the First some good hard tussles and with her own
second and last game in sight. She was to play Latimer High School on
the First Team gridiron on Saturday, and, with the big team away, the
contest was sure to draw a crowd and attain a semblance of importance,
and the Second, not at all loath to enjoy the limelight for once, was
resolved to make a good showing. Toby discovered suddenly on Tuesday
that his triumph over Roy Frick had apparently been gained, for during
three desperate and hard-fought periods against the First he remained
at quarter while his rival graced the bench. And Toby did himself
justice that afternoon if ever he had. To be sure the First Team
smashed out a score in each period, but she had to work for each, and
in the third twelve minutes the Second made a forty-six-yard advance
from mid-field to the First’s five-yard line, where, foiled thrice in
attempts at rushing, Toby tossed a short forward to Mawson, who fell
across the goal-line for a glorious six points. Listening to the storm
of reproach and accusation hurled at the First by their coaches, Toby
almost regretted the triumph!

Toby was used hard in that game. It seemed that nothing could stop the
opposing ends from getting down under punts, while anything in the
shape of protection for the catcher was invariably lacking. That wild
Tubb was the worst offender from Toby’s point of view. Tubb was forever
rushing on him the instant the ball settled into his arms, and Tubb
had learned to tackle now. Some of the hardest thumps Toby got that
afternoon were due to Tubb. Then toward the last of the play, Toby got
into a side-line mix-up and Jim Rose, who weighed close to two hundred,
sat on his neck in a way that spelled discomfort then and afterwards.
On the whole, although he had had a corking good time and was conscious
of having deported himself rather well, Toby reached the gymnasium in
a somewhat weak and battered condition and made no objection when Gyp
removed him to the rubbing room and made him swallow something that
tasted like ammonia and then did excruciating things to his neck for
a good ten minutes. Even after that he didn’t feel awfully bright and
chipper, and that night he fell asleep with his head pillowed on his
French dictionary and slept beautifully until Arnold rudely awakened
him and sternly sentenced him to bed.

The next afternoon, although he really felt as fit as ever, the
assistant trainer cast one stern and penetrating look at him and
ordered him off the field. “No work for you to-day, Tucker,” said Gyp.
“And don’t stick around here, either. Go and play tennis or something
easy. (Gyp was known to hold a supreme contempt for tennis!) Anyway,
stay outdoors.”

“Can’t I watch practice?” asked Toby ingratiatingly.

“You cannot! Beat it now, like I tell you!”

So Toby “beat it” and went back to the gymnasium and donned “cits” and
wandered down to the tennis courts and saw Horace Ramsey run away with
a set from the formidable Colcord, one of the mainstays of the Tennis
Team. Ramsey’s playing astonished Toby, and he said as much to that
youth when, later, they walked back up the slope together.

“I’ve improved my playing a lot the last two weeks,” said Ramsey.
“Some fellows don’t like cool weather for tennis, but I do. Maybe it’s
because I’m heavier and hot weather gets me. I think I’ve got the knack
of the back-hand stroke now. It worried me a lot at first. That’s the
first time I ever got Colcord six-three, though. He wasn’t at his best
to-day, I guess.”

“Heart troubling you much nowadays?” asked Toby slyly.

“Not a bit,” answered the other unsuspiciously. “I guess Mr. Bendix was
right about it. He said, you know, that he couldn’t find anything wrong
with it. Sometimes I think mother was too――too anxious and imagined a
lot. You know how mothers are, Tucker.”

“Yes.” Toby nodded. “My mother used to be that way, too. She used to
tell my father that I wasn’t strong enough to split wood, but dad never
believed her. And somehow I split it and lived to tell the tale! How
are you and Tubb getting along, Ramsey?”

“Getting along? Oh, fine. Why?”

“We-ell, just at first I thought I noticed a certain――er――coolness
between you.”

“Really?” Ramsey looked mildly surprised. “I don’t remember that. I
like George first rate. He used to be sort of touchy and――and gloomy,
but he isn’t now. Maybe he was homesick. He’s doing great things on the
football team, I hear.”

“Yes.” Toby unconsciously felt of a lame hip. “Yes, he certainly is!”

When Arnold came dragging himself in just before five he found his
roommate putting in some much-needed licks on his Latin. “Your friend
Tubbs――――” began Arnold presently.

“Tubb, Arn, still Tubb,” corrected Toby patiently. “Minus the sibilant
consonant.”

“Tubb, then. It’s a crazy name, anyway. What I was going to say
was that your friend Tubb played a very nice game of football this
afternoon.”

“So glad to hear it.”

“Yes.” Arnold chuckled. “And some one almost spoiled his fatal beauty.
They say it was Roy Frick.”

“How? What did he do to him?” asked Toby anxiously.

“How I don’t know. I didn’t observe it. What was done was enough,
though. Friend Tubb’s nose is all over his face. I suppose that in
time, after Andy has worked it back into shape and hitched it there
with plenty of plaster, it will resume its normal appearance, but at
the present writing it’s――well, it’s a sight and a strong argument
against the brutality of football!”

“Do you mean that Frick got him during play?”

“Well, it doesn’t look like play, but maybe it was!”

“You know what I mean, you seven-ply idiot! Did they have a scrap, or
what?”

“Oh, it was during the course of the gentlemanly encounter between
friends that we staged down there this afternoon. Honest, Toby,
it’s a wonder any one escaped without losing an ear or a jawbone or
something, the way those coaches drove us to-day! They were positively
blood-thirsty! That long-legged guy who’s coaching the guards and
tackles――――”

“Did Tubb try to get back at him?”

“At Frick? No, not that I know of. Maybe he has by now. Maybe,
though, it wasn’t Frick who plugged him. I only heard some one say so
afterwards; Casement I think.”

“It was Frick, I’ll wager,” said Toby. “Hang him, I wish he’d behave
himself until the season’s over. Tubb’s crazy to fight him, and I’m
afraid he will, and if he does some one will get on to it and he will
get the dickens.”

“That’s no joke,” agreed Arnold. “You’d better give him a tip to keep
quiet until after we’ve licked Broadwood. It wouldn’t do to lose as
good a chap as Tubb. I heard, by the way, that Frick and a couple of
other fellows had a mix-up with some of the mill toughs the other
night; Saturday I think it was; and that Frick, for once, got the short
end of it. Too bad they didn’t cure him!”

“Guess I’ll run up and see him after supper,” said Toby thoughtfully.

“Frick?” asked Arnold innocently.

“If I did I’d give him a good lesson,” answered Toby grimly. “No, Tubb.
I made him sort of promise to be good, but if Frick’s gone and pasted
him again――――” Toby shook his head lugubriously.

Arnold laughed. “Think his patience may wear thin after awhile, eh?
Well, I can’t say I’d blame him if it did. Still, he mustn’t be allowed
to get in wrong with faculty just yet. Go on up and read the riot-act
to him, old thing. By the bye, what happened to you this afternoon?
What kep ye?”

“Gyp,” said Toby. “He wouldn’t let me on. Said I was to play tennis
instead!”

“I thought that might be it. Well, I missed your smiling countenance
and cheerful voice. So did your team, I guess. They didn’t begin to
play the way they did yesterday. Did you play tennis?”

“Not likely! To tell the gospel truth, Arn, I guess I wouldn’t have
been much good to-day. I felt all right until Gyp told me I didn’t,
though. That’s funny, isn’t it?”

“Not at all, not at all. Power of suggestion, T. Tucker. Recognized
psychological phenomenon. When do we eat?”

Toby was surprised as well as embarrassed on reaching training table
that evening by the interest displayed in his welfare by his teammates.
It seemed that every one, with the possible exception of Roy Frick,
was eager and anxious to have his absence from practice satisfactorily
explained. Toby was somehow glad that Coach Burtis had not yet reached
the table, for the coach had a kindly but amused smile that made Toby
feel silly, and Toby was feeling silly enough as it was. Just at first
he thought the fellows were having fun with him, but their relief at
discovering that it was merely a lay-off that had kept him away was too
genuine to be mistaken.

“Well, Gyp has good sense,” commented Farquhar approvingly. “The First
certainly laid for you yesterday, Tucker, and I could see that you were
pretty well flattened out afterwards. Feeling all right now?”

“Fine, thanks. Somebody pass the milk, please.”

“Atta boy, Tucker!” said Nelson from across the board. “Don’t forget
Saturday. We’re going to need you, son!”

Toby saw Lovett glance toward Frick and exchange an amused glance
with Grover Beech, and wished Nelson had more tact, and nearly choked
drinking the milk with which Mawson had filled his glass. Then Mr.
Burtis came and asked Toby if his lay-off had straightened him out,
and again he said he was feeling fine, thanks, and after that some one
mercifully turned the conversation.

When supper was over he went in search of George Tubb. He had seen
Tubb leave the First Team table and took it for granted that he had
gone up to his room. But a knock on the portal of Number 31 elicited
no response and, on pushing the door open, the room proved to be dark
and empty. So he went down to Number 12, lighted up, got his books
together and started on some geometry problems that promised to give
him trouble. But the first one proved less awful than he anticipated
and so he went on to the second, and when he remembered George Tubb
again it was nearly nine. Arnold had not yet returned from a conference
at the gymnasium. Toby pushed his papers away, viewing the result of
his labors approvingly, and went back to the third floor. This time a
light showed from Number 31 and he found the room tenanted, but only by
Horace Ramsey.

“Where’s Tubb?” asked Toby.

“Haven’t seen him since before supper,” replied Horace, with a sigh
as he leaned back from his studying and stretched his arms overhead.
“I don’t think he’s been back here since he went down. I only came in
about half an hour ago, though. Want to see him? He may be over in
Dudley. He and a fellow named Dunphy are sort of thick. I don’t know
the number.”

“I’ll wait a few minutes if I’m not keeping you from studying. Maybe he
will be in.”

“Glad to have you,” replied Horace eagerly. “Try the big chair. It’s
all right if you don’t lean back too hard. Did you hear about the
wallop Tubb got this afternoon?”

“Yes, Deering told me about it. Does he think Frick did it?”

“He says he knows he did! You ought to have heard him go on about it!”
Horace chuckled. “Gee, he was mad!”

“You don’t suppose he’s――he’s looking for Frick now, do you?”

“By Jove! I wonder if he is! No, I don’t think so, though. He had sort
of cooled down by supper time. He looked like a South Sea pirate,
Tucker. They plastered his face all over and it hurt him to talk, I
guess. Not that that kept him quiet, though!”

“Well, I wish I knew for sure――――” muttered Toby. “If he gets to
scrapping with Frick and faculty learns of it――――”

“I don’t believe he will, honest. He said something about that,
something about wishing football was over so he could show Frick a good
time.”

Toby remained a half-hour longer, during which conversation touched on
many subjects, and then, as he was leaving, Tubb appeared. He seemed in
unusually good spirits and greeted the visitor almost boisterously, and
wouldn’t hear of Toby’s departing yet. “I’ve been over to Dudley seeing
a fellow named Dunphy,” he explained. “Know him?”

“A little,” said Toby. “What happened to your hand?”

“Oh, that?” Tubb held up his left hand and looked at a bleeding
knuckle. “Why, I barked it against the corner of Dudley. It was sort
of dark and I tried to turn too soon. Struck it against the stone, I
guess. It’s just a scratch.”

“You keep on,” observed Ramsey dryly, “and your folks won’t know you!
Isn’t he a picture, Tucker?”

Toby assented unsmilingly. Tubb did look fairly disreputable, for white
surgeon’s tape crossed and recrossed his nose over a pad of gauze and
gave him a peculiarly villainous appearance.

“Suppose you heard about this?” asked Tubb significantly, touching the
wounded member gingerly. Toby nodded. “That’s our friend Frick again.
It’s all right, though. Just one more little favor to return.”

“Seen him since?” asked Toby carelessly.

“Only at a respectable and safe distance,” replied Tubb, smiling. He
looked and sounded truthful, but Toby gave another look at the bleeding
knuckle and doubted.

“Well,” he said after a moment, “I hope you’ll keep away from him,
Tubb. You know we sort of decided you would.”

“Yes, I know. That’s all right. Friend Frick can wait. I’m in no
hurry. I was afraid that I might forget about him by the time there was
any comeback, but now, after this little memento, there’s no danger of
it!”

Presently Toby left, wondering whether Tubb was telling the truth
or was ashamed to confess that he had taken revenge on his enemy.
Certainly, it was quite possible to skin one’s knuckle by hitting it
against the rough stone trimming of one of the buildings, but somehow
Toby didn’t quite believe that Tubb had acquired his injury that way!




CHAPTER XXII

A VISIT TO THE OFFICE


Toby’s suspicions were confirmed the next morning. On the way back from
chapel he fell in with Sid Creel. Sid’s eyes were twinkling merrily as
he joined arms with Toby and fell into step. “Did you hear about Roy
Frick?” he demanded in a hushed but joyous voice.

Toby shook his head. He thought he knew what was coming, however.

“Some one beat him up,” said Sid, “beat him up beautifully! I haven’t
seen him, but that’s what Orlie Simpson says. He’s in his room and
won’t come out, and Orlie says he’s a sight!”

“When?”

“Last night. That’s all I know. Maybe it’s unkind to chortle, Tucker,
but he _did_ need it, didn’t he?”

“Maybe he did,” answered Toby gloomily.

“Well, what’s your trouble?” Sid observed him in surprise. “You sound
as if you were sorry for him!”

“Frick? No, I was only thinking that if there was any trouble about
it――whoever did it――――”

“Oh, he’s not likely to tell, I guess,” Sid chuckled. “Probably he will
say he fell downstairs or something! Well, see you later. Thought you’d
be interested in hearing the sad news. So long!”

After a two o’clock recitation Toby returned to Number 12 to leave his
books before going to the field and found a gray card awaiting him.
Toby had seen gray cards before and knew what they meant, but this time
his conscience was fairly untroubled and he wondered a good deal as he
read the printed form:

“The Principal desires to see Tobias Tucker in the School Office before
6 p.m.”

Even the clearest conscience will experience qualms on receipt of such
a document, and Toby sat down, card in hand, and asked himself what it
portended. It might be that bothersome Latin, although just of late it
hadn’t been going half badly and his instructor had even given him an
approving word but a day or two since. Of course it was conceivable
that a student might be summoned to the Office on some matter not
concerned with misdemeanors or derelictions. For instance, Toby told
himself, Doctor Collins might want to ask his advice regarding the
administration of Yardley Hall School!

Well, anyhow, he reflected presently, he had until six to keep the
appointment, and meanwhile it was getting close to practice time, and
whatever the matter might be it could wait. So he kicked off his shoes
in favor of a pair of rubber-soled “sneakers” and donned his oldest
jacket and set forth.

If troubles never come singly, as they say, the same may be said of
surprises. Toby’s second surprise that day came when the whistle had
put an end to a hard-fought battle with First Team in which he had
again kept the quarter-back position throughout. Possibly the fact
that Frick was not on hand may have had something to do with that, for
Rawson and Stair had been left well behind in the race for supremacy.
In any case, Toby put in forty minutes of actual playing and ran his
team well, although no score came to the Second to-day. Walking back
to the bench for his sweater, he heard his name called. Coaches Lyle
and Burtis were standing together nearby and it was Mr. Burtis who had
spoken. Toby joined them.

“You know Mr. Lyle, Tucker?” asked the Second Team coach. Wonderingly
Toby shook hands. “Mr. Lyle thinks he needs you on the First,”
continued Mr. Burtis. “Sorry to lose you, Tucker, but we’re almost
through, and I guess you may be able to help out over there.”

Toby looked bewildered. “You mean you want me――that I’m to go to the
First Team, sir?”

“Yes, Tucker, that’s the idea,” answered the First Team coach. “As you
know, we’ve lost Curran for the season. We still have a couple of good
quarters in Noyes and Winfield, but I’ll feel safer with another to
fall back on. I can’t promise you much glory, Tucker, for you may not
be needed this season. Perhaps all you’ll get is a lot of hard work, my
boy, but you’ll have the satisfaction of knowing that you’re doing your
bit for the School. Anyhow, there’s next year to look forward to. And
I dare say that, if you take hold the way I expect you to, you’ll get
your letter in the Broadwood game. Well, you report to me to-morrow,
will you?”

“Yes, sir, thanks!”

“Good!” Mr. Lyle shook hands again as though to seal the bargain, and
then Mr. Burtis shook hands in a way that conveyed the idea that he
was very pleased for Toby’s sake, and Toby escaped. Most of the First
and Second Team fellows had gone on ahead and he had the path pretty
much to himself on the way to the gymnasium. And he was glad, because
he wanted to think. He was a First Team man! That was wonderful, but
it was also disquieting. Suppose that by some strange and unforeseen
combination of events he was called on to play against St. John’s, or
even Broadwood! Gee, that would be pretty fierce! He guessed he just
couldn’t do it! No, sir, he’d be ill or something. Playing on the
Second was one thing and running up against a big team like St. John’s
was quite another. He would make a horrible mess of things, probably,
and die of disgrace! Then the comforting thought came to him that
there wasn’t the least chance of his getting into action in either of
the remaining contests, that all he would be required to do would be
to substitute now and then in practice. It would be pretty hard work,
of course, but it would be worth while. Even to be numbered among the
First Team was a proud privilege and cheap at any cost of labor. And
there was also the alluring possibility that he would get in for a
minute or two at the last of the big game, long enough to win the right
to wear the big blue Y!

He remembered Frick then and wondered if he would have been chosen
had Frick been out to-day. His modesty didn’t prevent his suspecting
that his work had pleased the coach better than Frick’s during the last
week or so, and he hoped that Frick’s absence from practice to-day was
not the reason for the choice falling where it had. But he couldn’t be
certain as to that, and in consequence he found no temptation to be
“swell-headed.”

It wasn’t until he had dressed and was leaving the gymnasium with
Sid Creel and Frank Lamson and one or two more that he remembered
that summons to the Office. Remembering, his heart sank. Suppose
something――he couldn’t think what it might be――but suppose something
had gone wrong and he was to learn that this new and wonderful good
fortune was to be denied him! Of course, that was perfect rot, for
he hadn’t done anything! Just the same he’d feel better when that
conference with the Principal was over.

The School Secretary waved him silently toward the inner office a few
minutes later and Toby confronted Doctor Collins. There was nothing
formidable about the Principal, but to-day Toby’s spine experienced the
sensation of becoming suddenly liquefied, for Doctor Collins fixed a
kind but stern look on him as he swung about in his chair.

“Ah, Tucker! Be seated, please.” The Doctor removed his glasses, held
them between him and the light from the broad windows, seemed satisfied
with their clarity and replaced them astride his nose. “One of our
fellows was set on last night by two other boys, Tucker, and badly
hurt. Perhaps you know him?”

“Roy Frick, sir? I know him a little. We’re――we were on the Second Team
together.”

“And you had heard of his――ah――injuries?”

“Yes, sir, Sid Creel told me this morning.”

“I see. Well, I’ve sent for you, Tucker, because Frick tells a strange
story of the event. At least, I find it strange. Perhaps you can throw
some light on it. According to Frick, he was returning from the village
last evening at about nine o’clock, perhaps a little after nine, and
just inside the main gate at the foot of the Prospect two boys jumped
out from the trees and seized him. That is to say, one boy seized him
and the other――ah――administered punishment. It appears to have been
rather a brutal affair, brutal and cowardly. You agree with me?”

“Yes, sir,” answered Toby troubledly. He had made up his mind by now
that no matter what happened he would not tell on Tubb.

“Yes. Now here is the strange――ah――feature of the story. Frick tells
us that the boy who punched and otherwise maltreated him was you,
Tucker.”

There was a moment of silence. Then: “_Me?_” gasped Toby.

The Principal nodded. “Yes, he says so. He declares that he saw you
well enough to recognize you, although the spot is a fairly dark one.
However, there is the possibility that he was mistaken. Doubtless you
can account for your time at that hour, Tucker.”

“Why, yes, sir! Of course I can! I wasn’t anywhere near the gate! I
wasn’t even outside Whitson! Besides, I’d have no reason to do it,
Doctor!”

“No? I gathered from Frick that there was a sort of feud existing
between you. However, that isn’t of consequence now. I’m very glad
indeed that you are in a position to disprove his accusation. Where
were you at that time, Tucker, and with whom?”

“Between nine and――――”

“Well, between nine and half-past, let us say. Frick thinks the time
was perhaps nine-ten or nine-fifteen.”

“I was in my room in Whitson, sir. I was doing some geometry.”

“Well occupied,” answered the Principal with a smile. “And your
roommate was with you, I presume?”

“Why, no, sir, he wasn’t,” stammered Toby. “Arnold was at a football
conference.”

“Oh!” Doctor Collins sounded disappointed. “Then between nine and, say,
a quarter-past nine you were quite alone? Did any one come into your
room about that time?”

“No, sir.” Toby’s heart sank. “I think it was a little after eight when
I came down from the third floor, and I studied until――I’m not just
certain, but I think it was about a quarter-past, sir.”

“Where were you on the third floor?”

“I went up to see George Tubb. He rooms in 31.”

“But that was, you say, shortly after eight. At what time did your
roommate return?”

Toby hesitated. Arnold had been in the room when he got back from that
second visit to Number 31, but how long he had been there Toby hadn’t
asked. Finally: “He was there a little before ten, sir.”

“Well, between the time you finished studying and his return where were
you, Tucker?”

Toby was prepared for that question. If he owned to having gone back to
Tubb’s room the Principal would probably suggest that Tubb be called
on to verify the statement, in which case it was more than likely
that Tubb’s absence from his room at the time when Frick was set upon
would become known. Perhaps, since Tubb was evidently not thought of
in connection with the affair, that was not dangerous, but to Toby it
seemed to offer a clew that any one would seize on. Toby’s reply came
without hesitation.

“I never left Whitson all the evening, sir, not for a moment,” he
said earnestly. “I was in the building from the time I came back from
practice until I went to chapel this morning.”

“I see. Well, I wish you had some one who could vouch for that, Tucker.
I think you are truthful, my boy, and that Frick made a mistake, but
I have no right to accept your word above his. We’ll let the matter
rest overnight. Perhaps you will think of some one who can testify
as to your whereabouts between nine and nine-thirty. Can you come
to me again at――――” the Doctor referred to a memorandum pad on the
desk――“eleven-thirty to-morrow?”

“Yes, sir.”

“Very well, do so. I’ve no doubt we can find a solution of the mystery
between us. Good afternoon, Tucker.”

Toby returned to Number 12 uneasy but not seriously troubled. It was
nonsense to suppose that Frick would persist in his silly story in the
face of his, Toby’s, denial, or that, even if he did, the Doctor would
hold the accused guilty on such slim evidence. Just the same, he felt
none too kindly toward George Tubb. Suppose the Principal did believe
Frick finally and――Toby frowned. “Gee, I’d get bounced maybe!” he
muttered. “Anyhow, they wouldn’t let me play. Oh, well, Tubb will just
have to ’fess up in that case and take his medicine!”

The thought that Tubb might refuse to do anything of the sort occurred
to him, but Toby put it resolutely aside. Tubb wasn’t that sort, he
assured himself. Whatever faults Tubb might have, at least he was
square.

Toby said nothing to Arnold or any one else that evening of what was
on his mind most of the time. He considered going up and telling Tubb
how matters stood, but he couldn’t see that anything was to be gained
by that and so he didn’t. At half-past eleven the next forenoon he went
back to the Office. Roy Frick, still bearing unmistakable signs of his
beating, was there before him. Doctor Collins got to business at once.

“Tucker, Frick says that he recognized you perfectly the night before
last. That is so, Frick?”

Frick nodded, glancing at Toby from discolored and still swollen eyes.
“Yes, sir. I saw him plainly twice. I couldn’t see the other fellow
very well, because he got me from behind. I just know that he was tall
and kind of slim. But I saw him all right.” Frick nodded toward Toby.

“What do you say, Tucker?”

“Why, I can’t say anything, sir,” answered Toby helplessly, “except
that he’s wrong. I wasn’t outside Whitson once that evening.”

The Doctor looked thoughtfully from one to the other. At last: “You
say, Frick, that there has been some sort of quarrel between you and
Tucker?”

“Yes, sir, sort of. He――he knocked me down one day when I hadn’t done
anything――――”

“Nothing but bounce a football off my be――off my head! And I didn’t
knock you down, and you know it. You tried to hit me and I gave you the
shoulder and you upset. Besides, I didn’t think any more about that.”

“Is there any one else who holds a grudge against you, Frick?” asked
the Principal.

“No, sir, not that I know of.” Then, catching Toby’s look and mistaking
its warning for an accusation, he qualified the statement. “Maybe Tubb
has it in for me a bit, but I know it wasn’t he.”

“Tubb?” asked the Doctor. “Who is Tubb?”

“George Tubb, sir. He’s on the First Team. We had――he thought I did
something to him intentionally when we were playing one day.”

“And you didn’t?”

“Not intentionally, sir.”

“And you’re certain the fellow who pummeled you was not Tubb?”

“Yes, sir. Tubb is thin, and this fellow was thickish and had red――had
hair like Tucker’s.”

“I see. Have you found any one, Tucker, who can confirm what you
told me yesterday as to your presence in your room between nine and
half-past?”

“No, sir, there isn’t any one.” Frick allowed himself the luxury of a
grin while the Principal was not looking, but it didn’t last long. It
still hurt him to move his mouth.

“Well, I don’t know,” said the Principal finally in tones almost as
helpless as Toby’s. “It sounds to me as if there might be what you
fellows would call a ‘catch’ in this business, but on the evidence I
don’t see but what I’ll have to hold you responsible, Tucker. If you
know anything bearing on the matter that you haven’t told me I think it
would be well to mention it, because, to be frank with you, I consider
this attack on Frick a particularly brutal and underhand affair
meriting severe punishment.”

Toby blinked but was silent. After a moment the Principal turned toward
Frick again. “From what you have told me I think it would be well for
you to be a little more careful in the future of your behavior toward
your fellows. I’m afraid you have a faculty for making trouble, my boy.
Should anything more of this sort reach my ears I shall be strongly
inclined to hold you partly to blame. That’s all for now. Good morning.”

Frick withdrew and the Doctor removed his glasses and polished them
deliberately and thoughtfully. At last, replacing them, he asked
gently: “Do you know who attacked Frick, Tucker?”

Toby hesitated. After all, he didn’t know, for Frick’s description
surely exonerated Tubb. So he shook his head and answered, “No, sir.”

“But you suspect some one?” the Principal insisted.

“I――I’d rather not answer, sir.”

“Even if I tell you that a severe punishment awaits the――ah――convicted
person?”

Toby shook his head again. Doctor Collins sighed.




CHAPTER XXIII

TUBB ON THE TRAIL


It didn’t take long for the news to get around the school. By evening
it was known everywhere that Toby Tucker was on probation for waylaying
Roy Frick and beating him up. A good many fellows took the stand that
Toby deserved a gold medal instead of probation, even while deploring
the fact that he had employed questionable means to wreak vengeance.
Having some one hold Frick while he punched him was not quite
sportsmanlike. Of course Toby was lost to football for the rest of the
season, although, as he was, at most, but a third-choice quarter, the
loss was not considered serious. If Coach Lyle thought otherwise no one
knew it.

Arnold was rabid when he heard the news from Toby and was all for
a swift descent on the Office and an indignant protest backed by
affidavits of good character. Toby, however, persuaded him to
relinquish the project.

“Well, then why don’t you go and finish the job on Frick?” demanded
Arnold. “At least you can have the satisfaction of punching his fool
head!”

“It doesn’t seem to me,” answered Toby dryly, “that that would be
conclusive evidence of my innocence.”

“Who said it would be? It would make things a lot easier, though,
wouldn’t it? It would for me, I’ll bet! Give me leave and I’ll do it
for you!”

“Much obliged, but I wouldn’t get much satisfaction out of it, I guess.
No, the only thing is to――――”

“What?” asked Arnold as Toby’s voice died into silence.

Toby shook his head. “Nothing. Stand it, I suppose. After all, it
doesn’t much matter. And I don’t believe Collins will keep me on very
long. I guess he sort of half thinks I’m shielding some one else.”

“You’re not, are you?” demanded Arnold suspiciously.

Toby laughed. “Well, where were you at nine o’clock that night, Arn?”

“Don’t be a gillie! I suppose you know that Frick will get your place
on the First? Mr. Lyle will have to take some one over, and he’s the
best there is left, isn’t he?”

“Yes. I――I hadn’t thought of that.”

“Well, think of it,” growled Arnold. “Not that it’ll do you much good!”

Toby did think of it. It seemed to make things much clearer to his
mind. Whether Frick had recognized his assailant or not, he was
accusing him because he wanted his place on the First. It was quite
simple. Frick probably thought that Toby had no suspicion of Tubb and
that Tubb would certainly not spoil the plot by confessing. This if
Frick had recognized Tubb. Toby was inclined to think that he had.

Anyway, Frick’s scheme was a success. Toby had not seen George Tubb
and he didn’t mean to. Tubb ought to take the blame, of course, but
Toby meant to leave the matter in his own hands. He couldn’t altogether
blame Tubb for taking vengeance on Frick, in view of the latter’s
offenses, and while Toby had no desire to be a martyr he had grown to
like Tubb and didn’t want him to lose his well-earned position on the
School Team. So far as it was a question of the good of the School, it
was far better for him to be punished than for Tubb to be. His loss to
the team meant very little, while Tubb’s absence in the Broadwood game
would be keenly felt. So, secretly, bitterly resentful toward Frick but
harboring no grudge toward any one else, Toby took his medicine.

Being on probation cut him off from many privileges, amongst them that
of seeing Yardley beat St. John’s on Saturday. Half the school made the
journey and returned home triumphing. The score was 12 to 0 and the
game was hard-fought and bristling with brilliant plays by both teams.
Tom Fanning, Larry Snowden and Ted Halliday came back crowned with the
laurel wreathes of heroes, although there were few on the Blue team who
didn’t deserve high praise. Coach Lyle’s charges had worked together
and individually in a manner to make the School proud of them, and that
Saturday evening saw a big and enthusiastic celebration in the Assembly
Hall and, later, outside. Toby didn’t attend it, since he was forbidden
to leave his room after supper without permission from the Office, but
he watched the triumphal end of it from his window and, although none
heard but he, added his voice to the cheering. He felt rather lonely
and rather downhearted that night, and even Arnold’s return a little
later failed to cheer him much. Arnold was sympathetic, but to-night he
was in an elated mood and very full of the afternoon’s game and the
evening’s jollification, and Toby’s mood didn’t respond.

On Sunday afternoon Toby ran into George Tubb on the stairs. They had
not met save in passing since the night of Frick’s escapade, and now of
the two, Toby was the more embarrassed. He would have passed on up to
his room, but Tubb wouldn’t have it. “Hold on,” said Tubb. “What’s your
hurry? Let’s go for a tramp.”

“Can’t, thanks, I’m in bounds just at present.” Toby smiled to show
that he didn’t mind, but Tubb scowled.

“Look here,” he said, “I want to talk to you about that, Tucker. Come
on outside somewhere. You can walk down to the field, can’t you?”

Toby could, and, after a second’s hesitation, decided that he would.
Once away from the buildings Tubb broke forth indignantly.

“Say, what sort of a game do you call that?” he exclaimed. “You make me
promise to lay off Frick, and then you go and pound him up yourself!
What’s the big idea, Tucker? I don’t get it!”

Toby stared. “And I don’t get you, Tubb,” he said finally. “You know
mighty well I didn’t touch Frick!”

“You didn’t? Then who――then why――Look here, aren’t you on pro for it?”

Toby nodded. “But I didn’t do it. I don’t _know_ who did it. Do you?”
Toby spoke carelessly, but Tubb’s eyes narrowed.

“Do I? Why should I? You don’t think――――” Tubb stopped and swung Toby
around by the arm. “You don’t think I did it, do you?”

“Why, I haven’t said――――”

“That means you do! Why the dickens haven’t you said so? What are you
up to?”

“Do you mean that you didn’t, Tubb?” asked Toby incredulously.

“Of course I didn’t,” was the impatient answer. “I said I wouldn’t,
didn’t I?”

“You said you’d think about it.”

“Well, it’s the same thing, you chump! Let’s get this settled, Tucker.
What do you know about it, anyway?”

“I thought I knew all about it,” replied Toby in puzzlement, “but I
guess I don’t know anything. If it wasn’t you, and it wasn’t me, and
Frick says it was me, and――――”

“Hold up! Better begin at the beginning. I’ve heard a lot of crazy
stories about it. You tell me it the way it was.”

So Toby did. And when he had finished Tubb shook his head bewilderedly.
“I don’t blame you for suspecting me,” he said. “But I was over in
Dudley and I can prove it by two or three fellows. And that knuckle
really did get skinned just as I told you. But that doesn’t explain
the business, does it? Some one else had it in for Frick and laid for
him. Either Frick knows who did it or he doesn’t know. If he does know
he lied to Doctor Collins, if he doesn’t know――well, he still lied
perhaps, but he might have thought it was you, Tucker. Is there any
other chap in school that looks like you?”

Toby shrugged. “There may be. I don’t know. I don’t suppose I know just
what I look like, for that matter. I guess there are other fellows
with――with hair like mine, though. That won’t get us anywhere.”

“No, I guess not. Look here, why not go to Frick and put it up to him?
Both of us, I mean. I don’t believe he’d dare lie if we were both
there.”

“Why not? He lied, if he did lie, when Doctor Collins and I were there.
Oh, there’s no use bothering, I guess. Let’s drop it. I’m sort of glad,
though, that it wasn’t you, Tubb.”

“Well, yes, but if you thought it was me why didn’t you tell the
Doctor so? Why did you let him sock it to you the way he did?”

“Oh, what was the use? You’d have got probation and lost the team, and
you’re too good a player to lose.”

“So that’s it?” Tubb looked away. Presently he said gruffly: “Well, it
was mighty decent of you, Tucker. Guess I wouldn’t have done it in your
place. Much obliged, even if――if it wasn’t any good.”

“It wasn’t anything,” said Toby calmly. “I just didn’t see any use in
letting Broadwood beat us for want of a good left end, that’s all.
You’d have done the same, though you think you mightn’t have.”

“Guess the team would have got by all right without me,” said Tubb.
“There’s Meadows, you know. He’s pretty good, if I did beat him out for
it. But, say, we’ve got to get to the bottom of this business, Tucker.
It won’t do to let Frick get away with it so easy. Have they taken him
over to the First in your place?”

“I don’t think they have yet. They will, of course.”

“I suppose so, unless we can put a spoke in his wheel. I’m going to
think this thing out, Tucker.”

“Help yourself. But keep away from Frick.”

“We-ell, all right. Bet you I could make him tell the truth, though,”
muttered Tubb. “The toad! You wait till we’re through with football,
Tucker! I’ll make that guy wish he’d never been born!”

“I may have something to say to him myself pretty soon,” said Toby
thoughtfully. “Now that I know I’m not getting you in trouble――――”

“Listen! You leave him to me,” said Tubb earnestly. “I don’t want him
all messed up when I’m ready for him. I want him whole, Tucker. You
give me first show at him and I’ll settle affairs for both of us. Is it
a bargain?”

“Yes, if you like. I want him to get what’s coming to him, but I’m not
particular who gives it to him! Well, I must be getting back. I’ve some
work to do. This thing of being on pro has one advantage, Tubb; it
gives you a fine chance to improve your class standing!”

Monday came, and Tuesday, and although Tubb assured Toby that he was
still hopeful of clearing up the mystery, nothing came of it. Frick
went to the First Team on Tuesday. Mass meetings were held on the
slightest provocation and the school talked football from morning to
night. The last scrimmage between the Second Team and the First was
held on Wednesday and Toby went down and looked on. The Second, not
yet recovered from a gruelling game with Latimer High School four days
before which had ended in a 7 to 7 tie, and deprived of the services
of a first-class quarter-back, was no match for the big team and was
cruelly humbled. That was the Second’s swan-song, for when the whistle
blew for the end she cheered the First and then cheered for herself and
then, cavorting and yelling, piled up the hill to the gymnasium while,
from the stands, followed a long cheer with three rousing “Seconds!”
on the end of it. After Wednesday, save for “skull practice” in the
gymnasium in the evenings and a thorough signal drill on Thursday,
there was nothing to be done but wait for Saturday and the enemy’s
invasion.

Toby had become fairly reconciled to his state by Thursday, and was
inclined to make fun of George Tubb’s efforts to fasten the guilt of
the assault on the right person. But Tubb refused to give up, although
he was clearly discouraged. Or he was until Friday. Then, just after
supper, he pounced in on Toby in Number 12 and asked a breathless
question.

“Didn’t you tell me once that the guy who punched you the day you
fellows played Greenburg High had red hair?” he asked.

“Did I? I may have. Anyway, he did.”

“How big was he?”

“Oh, I don’t know. Why?”

“Never mind why! Answer the question! Was he bigger than you?”

“N-no, about the same height, I guess, and maybe about my build. You’re
not trying to make it out that――――”

“Never mind what I’m trying to do! That’s all! Much obliged to you!”
And Tubb rushed out again.




CHAPTER XXIV

FRICK IS CALLED AWAY


That momentous Saturday dawned crisp and bright. Yardley Hall School
was early afoot and there was, from the first awakening, a flood
of contagious excitement, repressed during chapel but let loose
immediately afterwards. Breakfast, for the average boy was hilarious,
for the two dozen or so fellows who would or might meet Broadwood in
the afternoon it was a trying ordeal at which the usual viands had lost
their flavor and where swallowing was often a painful task. Fortunately
for both faculty and students, experience had taught the futility of
holding the usual Saturday recitations on the morning of the Broadwood
contest, and all but a very few were abandoned.

Toby awoke in excellent spirits that day. After all, a fellow can’t
have everything he wants, and here was a corking morning, the big game
at hand and Yardley trained to the moment; and Toby concluded that he
had no grouch coming to him! Besides, if playing on the School Team
meant being in such a state of mind as Arnold was in, why, one was
much better off it! For Arnold had a horrible case of stage-fright.
He fidgeted and gloomed and was alternately a pest and a subject for
the deepest sympathy. Toby had but one recitation, at eleven, and so,
after breakfast, he set himself the task of keeping Arnold from jumping
into the river or biting holes in the pavement. A walk seemed the best
medicine, and the two strolled down to the tennis courts and watched
there awhile and then across the field――Toby tossing his cap over the
cross-bar of the south goal for good-luck――and went upstream along the
river bank. Of course Arnold talked nothing but football, and Toby let
him chatter to his heart’s content. Talking appeared to make Arnold
less glum. Finally they struck inland by the golf links and dodged
balls for a half-mile on the way back, reaching Whitson again at about
ten, unaware that a visitor had called and, finding Toby absent, had
gone his way again without leaving his card.

Arnold wandered off after a few minutes and Toby tried to prime himself
a little for the coming recitation. Then, just before eleven, he
clattered downstairs and over to Oxford, pausing once or twice to
hold jerky conversation with excited friends. Followed a harrowing
half-hour, harrowing for Mr. McIntyre, otherwise known as “Kilts,” the
mathematics instructor, and for a roomful of restless and, for the
nonce, surprisingly stupid boys. There was an audible sigh of relief
at dismissal, a sigh that swelled to a shout as the fellows gained
the doorway and piled out onto the sunlit steps of the old granite
building. Toby lingered to talk to Steve Lippman a minute, and there
Billy Tarrant, the assistant manager of the School Team, found him
after a long search. Tarrant pushed his way through the crowd and
grabbed Toby’s arm.

“You’re wanted in commons, Tucker,” he announced. “Get a move on!”

Toby hung back. “What for?” he asked. “Who wants me?”

“Mr. Lyle. I don’t know what for. Something about the team. Come on!
I’ve been hunting you for half an hour.”

“Oh! Well, all right.” Toby followed obediently, wondering nevertheless.
Half-way, a simple explanation presented itself. Perhaps the Yardley
fellow who was to have handled the chain in the game couldn’t serve, and
they were going to let him do it. Toby concluded that this was his lucky
day after all. The dining-room doors were closed, but Tarrant thrust
open the nearer one and pushed Toby inside. The First Team crowd were
seated around the training table. Mr. Lyle was talking and Tarrant and
Toby trod on their tiptoes down the length of the room. Andy Ryan arose
and noiselessly set chairs for the new arrivals, and Toby seated himself
gingerly, aware that many of the gathering had glanced at him curiously
and that Arnold’s countenance was one big exclamation point! Then,
between the heads of those near him, he caught a glimpse of George
Tubb’s face, and George was looking at him and making silent words with
his lips that Toby couldn’t read. He shook his head helplessly and tried
to listen to the coach. Mr. Lyle was going over his instructions for the
battle in a very quiet tone. Now and then he asked a question and some
one answered, once or twice wrongly. But Toby, consumed by curiosity,
heard little of the discourse. Even when the manager wheeled a
blackboard over and the coach made circles and straight lines and wavy
lines with a piece of chalk, and every one else watched with almost
painful attention and in perfectly soggy silence, Toby just kept right
on wondering why he was there. For an outsider to be present during
these mystic rites was absolutely unheard of! For a wild, breathless
moment the idea came to him that Doctor Collins had relented and that he
had been reinstated on the team. But that was too improbable, too absurd
for credence! Besides, there was Roy Frick over there, looking
supercilious and self-important.

Then the coach stopped talking, the blackboard was moved back to the
wall and there was a great scraping of chairs. And almost at the same
moment the waiters came in with loaded trays and a cold lunch was set
on the table, big platters of sandwiches and dishes of plain cake and
pitchers of steaming hot cocoa and of milk and bowls of oranges, and
every one began helping himself and eating where he sat or stood. Every
one, that is, but Toby. Toby sat where he had been put and looked on in
puzzlement. Or he did until the coach remembered him and, a sandwich in
one hand and a cup of cocoa in the other, came to him.

“No appetite, Tucker?” he asked cheerfully. “That won’t do. Better try
some of this hot cocoa and worry a couple of sandwiches down. I guess
I know how you feel, my boy, but there’s no call to be nervous.”

“No, sir,” gulped Toby. “I――I’m not nervous, Mr. Lyle. I――――”

“That’s right! Wade in and get some food then. Glad you got back to us,
Tucker.” The coach turned away again, his eye on the sandwich platter,
and Toby followed him.

“Mr. Lyle!” The coach stopped. “Mr. Lyle, will you please tell me what
you――what the――what I’m doing here?”

“Eh? What you’re doing here? Why, you’re supposed to get your luncheon,
Tucker. What do you mean?”

“But――but I’m not on the team, sir, and I don’t understand. Tarrant
said you wanted me over here and――――”

“Didn’t he tell you why? Didn’t Tubb tell you? Hasn’t _any one_ told
you?”

Toby shook his head mutely, almost apologetically.

“Well!” The coach took Toby’s arm and walked him over toward a window.
“I’m sorry. Tucker,” he said, “I thought of course you knew. Not that
I know much myself, though. All I do know is that Tubb came bounding
to me an hour or more ago and told me you were square at the Office
and wanted me to put you back. He said there had been a mistake and
that you hadn’t done what you were supposed to have done. I told him
I didn’t think you’d be an awful lot of use, after being out for more
than a week, but that I was quite willing to have you back on the
squad anyway. So I called up the Office and found it was all right
and sent Tarrant to look for you. That’s all I know, Tucker. If I can
work you in for a minute I’ll do it, but I make no promises. It’s sort
of hard lines on you, though, and I’ll do my best. Have you forgotten
everything you knew?”

“No, sir!” gasped Toby. “Only――only I guess you’d better not try to use
me, Mr. Lyle, because I don’t know the signals very well.”

“Do you know them at all?”

“Yes, sir, a little. I room with Deering, and he’s coached me some so I
could sort of coach him.”

“Get Curran to go through them with you. I’ll speak to him. If you’ll
get them pat between now and the last half, Tucker, I’ll see that you
get your letter. Now get some food into you.”

Toby seized on as many sandwiches as one hand would hold and poured out
a glass of milk. Then he made his way around the table to Tubb. “What
happened?” he whispered.

Tubb grinned. “Thought you’d be over here to ask pretty soon! I’ll
tell you all about it, Tucker. Wait till I get another hunk of cake.
Cake’s pretty good stuff when you’ve been off it a month or so! Guess
this sort won’t hurt you if you eat a loaf of it! Now, then. Remember
telling me that Frick――――” Tubb lowered his voice and glanced about
him, edging further from the throng. “Remember telling me that Frick
had a row with some of the town boys one night a long while ago?”

Toby nodded. “Arnold told me about it,” he said.

“Well. Then do you remember telling me about a red-headed chap who
punched you in the face the day the Second played Greenburg?”

Toby began to see light. “You mean he was the one who――――”

“Sure! All I did was put two and two together. Then, last night, I
risked being caught out of bounds and hunted the guy up. It wasn’t
hard. The first loafer in Greenburg I asked recognized the description
and sent me to a pool parlor. He was there all right and I got him to
come outside and talk. He was willing to talk, too. Seems that he
and two or three others got into a scrap with about the same number
of our fellows one evening just across the bridge and he and Frick
sort of took to each other and were having a merry scrap until Frick
pulled something hard from a pocket and cut this chap’s scalp open.
Sheehan――that’s the guy’s name――says he thinks Frick used a bunch of
keys or something like that. He doesn’t think it was a knife, anyway.
Our fellows got away――or the others did, and that ended it. Sheehan
says it was a nice little scrap, only Frick shouldn’t have sprung the
‘rough stuff’! So he got sore and decided he’d lay for Frick and get
even. Says he tried three or four times, but each time he saw Frick
there were fellows with him. But the other night he found him and got
him!”

“He oughtn’t to have done it the way he did, though. I mean it was sort
of rotten to have some one else hold Frick while――――”

“Huh! That’s the joker, Tucker!”

“What do you mean?”

“There wasn’t any other fellow! Sheehan got as sore as a pup when I
said something about that. Says he was alone and that every time he
knocked Frick down he had to lift him up again! Says Frick was game,
all right, but had to beg off finally. Then Sheehan found his cap for
him and went with him almost to the top of the Prospect because he was
pretty wobbly on his pins.”

“What do you know!” exclaimed Toby. “But why――――”

“Because he didn’t want any one to know that he’d been licked in a fair
fight. And, another thing, Tucker: I asked Sheehan if Frick knew who he
was fighting with, and Sheehan said, sure he did, that he took pains to
tell him! So, you see, friend Frick lied all the way through. When he
got to thinking things out he saw that if he could put the blame on you
he’d get you off the team and probably get your place.”

“I guess so,” agreed Toby. “I’m most awfully much obliged to you, Tubb.
You’re a perfect brick to take so much trouble and――――”

“Ginger! I enjoyed it. I tried to find you this morning the first
chance I got, but you were off somewhere. So I went right over to the
Office and waited around and saw the Doctor and told him the whole
yarn. I offered to get Sheehan up here if the Doctor would agree not to
make trouble for him. Sheehan was sort of afraid he might be arrested
or something, I guess. But the Doctor said he’d take my word for it.
After that I looked for you again, but you had a class, I guess, and
then it was time to come over here. And that’s the whole business. How
do I stand as a Sherlock W. Holmes?”

“A1,” laughed Toby. “But, listen, what about Frick? What did the Doctor
say about him?” Toby looked around in search of that youth but couldn’t
see him.

“No use looking for him,” chuckled Tubb. “He went out five minutes
ago. Some one came to the door and called him. Don’t believe we’ll see
him again for awhile! He will be lucky if they let him stick around. I
wouldn’t be surprised if he got fired, though. It might be just as well
for him if he did,” Tubb added grimly, “because if he’s around here
the day after to-morrow he’s going to be awfully sorry for some of the
things he’s done!”

“All over to the gym!” called Andy Ryan.




CHAPTER XXV

FOURTH DOWN


For thirty minutes of actual playing time the Blue of Yardley and the
Green of Broadwood had advanced and retreated up and down the trampled
field of battle. And now the fifteen minute intermission was nearing
its end and the rival cheering sections ceased their songs and the
cheer leaders, megaphones in hand, watched the slope for sight of
the returning warriors. Then the cheers broke forth and the squads
trotted down the hill, Yardley in the lead, and blue flags waved and
green pennants fluttered and pandemonium reigned. On the scoreboard
no chalked figures followed the names of the contenders, for neither
side had scored. Never perhaps in the history of the schools had their
teams waged a closer conflict. Not once had the ball been inside either
twenty-five-yard line in scrimmage, not once had the Blue or the Green
seriously threatened the opposing goal. It had been a hard-fought,
gruelling battle in mid-field, the ball constantly changing hands.
No errors of judgment had given advantage, no fumbles had marred the
almost perfect play. Twice penalties had been exacted, once from each
team. Machine-like smoothness, thorough teamwork had been the order
all through the first two periods, and individual brilliancy had been
subordinated. Both teams seemed loath to break away from the safety of
old-style football, and line-plunges interspersed with dashes outside
tackle had ruled. Once Broadwood had tried a forward-pass, but it had
failed and she had not attempted a second. It was still anybody’s game.

Neither side made any changes as the third period started. For Yardley
the line-up was still as before: Tubb, Fanning, Rose, Simpson,
Casement, Bryan, Halliday, Noyes, Roover, Deering, Snowden. It was
Broadwood’s kick-off and Yardley hustled the ball back to her twenty
and went at the line again. The Green stopped her for seven yards and
Snowden punted to the rival’s twenty-odd. Broadwood tried the left end
and made four, tried the center and lost two, sent her backs at right
tackle and gained three, and punted to Yardley’s forty. Deering caught
and skirted back ten before he was upset. Roover got two past right
tackle and three inside right guard. Deering fought through for two
more. Snowden punted. And so it went while the precious minutes sped.

On the bench, huddled in sweater and blanket, Toby watched anxiously
with the others. And as he watched he strove to keep in mind the lesson
that Curran had been teaching him since an hour before the game. The
new signals were simple, but there were three sequences that wouldn’t
stay put in his mind. Of course, it probably didn’t matter much whether
he remembered them or didn’t, for it was safe to say that the coach
would not let him in until the game was either well won or lost beyond
the possibility of recovery. But it was like Toby to keep hammering
away just the same.

Noyes misjudged a punt, his first error, and for a long and anxious
four minutes Broadwood hovered about the Blue’s thirty-yards, the
ball in her possession. Then the second forward-pass of the game was
intercepted by Tubb, and, although he could not get away, he clung
tightly to it when tackled and a moment later Snowden had again punted
far down the field. Ten minutes had passed of the precious thirty
left. Broadwood, fighting back, piled through Yardley’s center for six
yards and the green pennants waved and Broadwood voices shouted their
triumph. Noyes, limping and white-faced, came off and Winfield took his
place at quarter and the Green made her distance for the third time
that day. But she was still on her own ground. A full-back run ended
disastrously and she punted to Winfield on his own thirty-seven and
that slim youth dodged and weaved his way through half the opposing
team and was only downed when twenty yards lay behind him. Yardley
implored a touchdown in measured chorus. With three to go on fourth
down, Yardley hesitated. Before she had decided the whistle signaled
the end of the quarter.

On the stands the supporters of the Blue spoke sadly or hopefully of
a no-score game. The teams sought the water buckets and lined up once
more. But now there were new faces in the opposing ranks. Both sides
had begun to call on their reserves. Snow went in for Casement and
Candee for Simpson on the Blue team and Broadwood put in a new end and
a new half-back.

Winfield called for the three yards on a double-pass play that sent
Deering outside left tackle and just failed of the distance. Broadwood
opened up her play then. Two forward-passes were tried, of which the
first failed and the second won a short ten yards. A fake-kick, with
the quarter holding the pigskin, added seven more. Yardley rooters
watched in silent agony now. The Green piled through for the rest of
the distance and the Broadwood stands went crazy with joy. But there
was still a long way to go and Yardley found herself again after
another play or two and held for downs when six inches would have given
Broadwood a new life. Then came a wild and thrilling end run by Deering
that took the ball over four white lines and placed it on Broadwood’s
thirty-six. But a fumble by the Blue’s quarter spoiled it and Broadwood
recovered the ball. Three attempts netted little and the ball sailed
back up the field. Winfield again misjudged and the pigskin went over
his head and trickled closer and closer to the Blue’s goal-line,
Deering and Winfield in pursuit and two eager Broadwood ends almost
upon them. It was Arnold who fell on the ball safely just short of his
fifteen-yard-line and who clung to it stoutly while the enemy pounced
down on him.

“Six minutes left,” growled Curran, at Toby’s side. “Why don’t we open
up? Winfield acts as if we hadn’t a play in the bag but line-plunges!”

Noyes, nearby, almost too wearied to hold up his head, grunted.

“They know everything we’ve got, Curran,” he said. “Watch them when
we give the signals. They’re wise to every move! And those backs are
wonders! We can’t get away from ’em.”

“Well, we might try!” retorted Curran savagely. “No use lying down, is
there? There we go, back at the old hammer again! What’s Tom up to?
Oh, Winfield’s coming off. You in again? But you can’t. Who’s Mr. Lyle
after? It’s you, Tucker! Boy, it’s you! Remember those signals and
shake it up, Tucker, shake it up!”

“Tucker! Come on, come on!” Mr. Lyle was calling and beckoning. Toby,
with heart pounding and his throat hot, ran to him on the side-line.
“Here’s your chance. Know the signals? Good! Get in there and put some
punch into that team. Tell Fanning I say he’s got to open up. Tell him
the time’s come to score! Give ’em some running plays, boy. Put ginger
into that bunch. Here, Snow! Go in for Casement. All right, Tucker!
Beat it!”

Cheers and more cheers, cheers for Winfield and for Casement, cheers
for the substitutes speeding on, cheers from across the field, a medley
of mad sound that beat on Toby’s ears like a cataract. Then he was in
the squad, Fanning twitching him aside, Arnold thumping him on the
back, Snowden, white and gasping, patting his shoulder imploringly.
“Let me get at ’em, Tucker, will you? Let me try ’em, will you? Let
me――――”

“Shut up, Larry! What’s the word?” Tom Fanning pulled Toby away. Toby
gave the message.

“All right! Open her up! We’ve tried their line until we’re sick of it!
There’s six minutes yet, nearly. Come on, Yardley! Let’s get it, let’s
get it! We can do it! What do you say?”

“_Signals!_” shrilled Toby, his voice pitching itself up amongst the
clouds as it seemed to him. “_Signals!_”

It was Yardley’s ball on third down near her twenty, with five to go.
Snowden got four of that five and then two more, making it first down
on the twenty-five. Then began a march up the field that is still
spoken of with bated breath at Yardley. It was a march against time.
To the middle of the field went the Blue without a halt. Substitutes
went into the opposing line and back-field, but still Yardley advanced.
Snowden was the hero of that advance, Snowden first and then Deering,
for it was Arnold who got away from Broadwood’s forty-four and plunged
onward to her twenty-six. And after that it was Snowden again and then
Lamson and again Snowden, and the teams were on the twelve yards.
Broadwood was fighting for time, delaying all she dared. The two
minutes had been announced when Toby gave the ball to Snowden for a
final slide off tackle on the left that, if it went right, would place
the ball well in front of the goal. And it did go right, although it
took the last ounce of Snowden’s strength and he had to be literally
carried off the field.

Watson was hustled on in his place and Yardley was cheering wildly,
exultantly for a score. The ball lay just over the ten-yard line now.
Four downs would spell victory or defeat. Less than a minute remained.
Fanning, almost ready to drop in his tracks, whispered hoarsely of a
drop-kick. Toby, seeing his condition, knew he would never make it and
shook his head. Fanning didn’t insist. Perhaps he was a bit relieved
that he need not make the effort.

“We’ll put it over,” declared Toby confidently. “We can do it!”

But Broadwood had massed her defenses solidly and when, fighting now
against time as well as against the enemy’s desperate resistance,
Deering had plunged to the left off tackle with scarcely a yard to show
for it, Toby’s confidence was disturbed. The Broadwood stand cheered
relievedly, exultantly. Tired warriors staggered to position. A babel
of shrill cries arose, the referee’s dominating all.

“_Second, and nine to go!_”

Toby studied the opposing defense, a forward pass in mind, but
Broadwood was set for such a trick. It would never go, and if it failed
the Green would have the ball as sure as shooting. The pigskin was
opposite the left hand goal-post now and, lest a field-goal should
prove the last resort, it must be kept centered. Toby thought hard and
fast and then shrilled his signals. Heming, who had taken Snowden’s
place, hurled himself at the living wall and floundered into it for
nearly two yards. Broadwood and Yardley cheers mingled.

“Roover back!” yelped Toby. “67――33――21!” He looked about at the drawn,
intense faces of the three backs. “Make it good! 67――33――21――111――――”

Toby slapped the ball into Roover’s arms, dug in behind him and
followed, floundering, pushing, panting. The Green’s defense wavered,
gave, held again. Grunts and groans and hoarse breathings filled the
air, and through them the shrill piping of the whistle came.

“_Third and seven to go!_”

The fake-kick had failed to fool the enemy. Toby looked almost
despairingly along the line, searching for some telltale sign in a
Broadwood countenance that would hint of failing strength, but he saw
none. Distress there was in plenty, but grim determination as well.
Seven yards still to go and but two downs left! If only Snowden had
remained to try the field-goal! Roover might do it, but Roover was
spent and reeling. A horrid fear that failure was to be their portion
took possession of Toby for an instant and his heart sank. But the
instant passed and he raised his voice cheerfully, encouragingly:

“That’s the stuff, Yardley! One more like that and we’re over! They’re
quitting! Get into this hard! Here’s where we win! Signals!”

Heming again, with Roover once more back in kicking position, Heming
smashing at the opposing right guard, stopping, edging on, and again
stopping, with every Broadwood defender massed before him, thrusting,
grunting, fighting like mad. And again the whistle and the quick voice
of the referee.

“_Fourth down! Five and a half to go!_”

“_Twelve seconds!_” shouted some one.

“Come on, Yardley!” shrieked Toby. “Get in there, Snow! Let’s finish
it! You’ve got to do it this time! It’s your last chance, fellows! Hold
that line now! Hold it! Roover back!”

The Broadwood defense widened, the backs spread, the ends poised to
dash around on the kicker. And Toby, noting, was triumphant. Something
had called back to memory that day when, volunteering to play quarter
on the second and finding his mind blank of plays, he had unwittingly
sent a half straight into the line and made the distance. It was
the unexpected that won then, he reflected, and now it must be the
unexpected to win again. Broadwood was certain that the enemy would not
waste her last chance on a line assault with more than five yards to
go. Broadwood looked for a try-at-goal or, failing that, a short, quick
heave over the line. Toby looked around. A half must take the ball, for
the play must go fast. He wanted Arnold, but Arnold was not fit for
the task. Heming, fresher, his young face white with excitement and
longing under the streaks of dirt, must make the attempt. Toby called
the signals. The tense bodies stiffened. The ball shot back from center
to Heming. Roover feigned to catch and kick. The Broadwood ends came
racing in. Confusion reigned, and in the very center of it, plunging,
fighting, the Yardley ends and backs behind him, was Heming.

Straight at center he had gone. There was no hole awaiting him, but
the assault was so sudden, so unexpected that the enemy gave and he
went smashing through. Then the Broadwood backs threw themselves to
the rescue and the line held. For a moment the advance paused and the
referee’s whistle went to his lips, and in that moment Roover charged
in behind the struggling wedge, the mass moved forward again, a foot,
a yard, faster, and yet faster! And then, suddenly the defense fell
to pieces and Heming, his head and shoulders well above the sea of
writhing bodies, shot forward and down and was gone from sight. And
from the Yardley stands arose a straining shout that reached even Toby,
buried deep in the wake of the victory!

       *       *       *       *       *

A few minutes later, when goal had been tried for and missed, when
cheers were hurtling up at a shadowing sky and the field of battle was
a mad scene of Yardley rejoicing, Toby, rather the worse for wear, got
to his feet, assisted by Arnold and Tubb, while about them an impatient
mob waited to seize them and carry them off. He cast an apologetic
look at Arnold.

“I’m awfully sorry, Arn,” he panted.

“Sorry for what?” demanded the other.

“That fourth down. I wanted you to have the ball, Arn, but I didn’t
dare. You were too done up. It had to be Heming, honest!”

“Oh, forget it, old dear! Of course it had to be Heming! What do you
suppose I care? We won, didn’t we?”

“Did we?” exclaimed Tubb exultantly. “_Did we!_ Why, say――――”

“Then that’s all right,” said Toby happily. “I was afraid――――”

But Toby’s fear was never voiced then, for the waiting mob descended on
them and rude hands hoisted them aloft, and Toby, bobbing about above
the heads of the laughing, shouting, pushing throng, knew for a moment
a joy of triumph as great as Alexander’s after the Battle of Issus!


THE END




 Transcriber’s Notes:

 ――Text in italics is enclosed by underscores (_italics_).

 ――Printer’s, punctuation and spelling inaccuracies were silently
   corrected.

 ――Archaic and variable spelling has been preserved.

 ――Variations in hyphenation and compound words have been preserved.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FOURTH DOWN! ***

***** This file should be named 63892-0.txt or 63892-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
    http://www.gutenberg.org/6/3/8/9/63892/

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org 

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary 
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg eBook, Four Pilgrims, by William Boulting


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions 
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.




Title: Four Pilgrims


Author: William Boulting



Release Date: November 27, 2020  [eBook #63894]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FOUR PILGRIMS***


E-text prepared by Turgut Dincer and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team (http://www.pgdp.net) from page images generously made available by
Internet Archive (https://archive.org)



Note: Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive. See
      https://archive.org/details/fourpilgrims00bouliala





FOUR PILGRIMS

by

WILLIAM BOULTING

Author of
_Giordano Bruno: his Life, Thought, and Martyrdom_;
_Woman in Italy, 1100–1600 A.D._, etc.






London:
Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner & Co., Ltd.,
New York: E. P. Dutton & Co.




ERRATA.


Page 84, Line 2. For “a little before” read “some time after.”




CONTENTS


  I: HIUEN-TSIANG

  _Master of the Law; and his Perilous Journey to the Sacred
  Land of Buddha_, A.D. 627–643.

  CHAP.                                              PAGE

    I. THE ISOLATION OF CHINA                           1

   II. BUDDHA AND BUDDHISM                              5

  III. AN ADVENTUROUS JOURNEY                           9

   IV. THROUGH INDIA IN THE SEVENTH CENTURY            27

    V. INDIAN SOCIAL LIFE IN THE SEVENTH
         CENTURY                                       47

   VI. THE JOURNEY HOME BY A NEW AND
         PERILOUS ROUTE                                55

  VII. PEACEFUL DAYS                                   61


  II: SÆWULF, AN ENGLISH PILGRIM TO
  PALESTINE

    I. EARLY PILGRIMAGE TO PALESTINE                   65

   II. “DIEU LE VEULT”                                 68

  III. SÆWULF’S RECORD                                 72


  III: MOHAMMED IBN ABD ALLAH,

  _Better known as Ibn Batûta, the Greatest of Moslem
  Travellers_, A.D. 1304–77.

     I. THE WHIRLWIND FROM ARABIA AND WHAT
          FOLLOWED                                     89

    II. A RESOLUTE PILGRIM                             96

   III. A ROUNDABOUT PILGRIMAGE                       104

    IV. GLIMPSES OF ARABIA, PERSIA AND EAST
          AFRICA IN THE FOURTEENTH CENTURY            109

     V. TO INDIA BY WAY OF CONSTANTINOPLE AND
          THE STEPPES                                 117

    VI. AN EASTERN DESPOT                             128

   VII. PERILS BY LAND AND SEA                        137

  VIII. OFF TO MALAYSIA AND CATHAY                    147

    IX. MOORS OF SPAIN AND NEGROES OF TIMBUKTU        158


  IV: LUDOVICO VARTHEMA OF BOLOGNA,

  _Renegade Pilgrim to Mecca, Foremost of Italian Travellers_.

     I. THE GREAT AGE OF THE RENAISSANCE AND
          OF DISCOVERY                                163

    II. FROM VENICE TO DAMASCUS                       165

   III. OVER THE DESERT TO MECCA                      172

    IV. THE ESCAPE FROM THE CARAVAN                   186

     V. CERTAIN ADVENTURES IN ARABIA THE HAPPY        190

    VI. EASTWARD HO!                                  200

   VII. THE PAGANS OF NARSINGA                        208

  VIII. FARTHER INDIA, MALAYSIA AND THE BANDA
          ISLANDS                                     221

    IX. SOME CUNNING MANOEUVRES                       235

     X. WAR BY LAND AND SEA                           244

    XI. THE NEW WAY ROUND THE CAPE                    249




PREFACE


Pilgrimage has been popular in all countries and at all times. For what
could be happier than an agreeable change which should contribute at
once to welfare of soul, refreshment of spirit, and vigour of body?
Adventures on the way gave zest to the enterprise. If the more timid
or feeble were content to visit neighbouring shrines, those of hardier
mould, like the Wife of Bath, took more formidable journeys.

  “Thries hadde she been at Jerusalem;
   She hadde passed many a straunge strem;
   At Rome she hadde been, and at Boloigne,
   In Galice at Seint Jame, and at Coloigne,
   She koude muchel of wandrynge by the weye.”

Some of the boldest and bravest of ancient travellers were pilgrims,
and we have their records of wide wandering. But their style is
archaic, has at best little purely literary merit, and is usually
forbidding. They are little known, except to the special student.

The footprints then are scanty, and all the worse for time, which
testify to ardent spirits that once inhabited the warm vesture of
flesh, but have long, long ago been laid to rest. I have tried to
set forth certain of these dead and half-forgotten worthies as with
“organs, dimensions, senses, affections, passions,” even as we. Four
have been chosen. Three of these were shrewd, fearless, observant
men, who overcame surpassing obstacles and met with adventure almost
unparalleled. The first of my bundle of four was a Chinaman, a Buddhist
monk of the early Seventh Century, who started alone on an almost
impossible quest. My second was an Englishman of the earliest years
of the Twelfth Century, who gives us some notion of what the ordinary
palmer was like who got to Jerusalem,

                  “e qui devoto
  Il gran sepolchro adora e scioglie il voto”

(“and venerates the Holy Sepulchre and discharges his vow”). My third
was a Mohammedan, who, in the first half of the Fourteenth Century,
made several pilgrimages to Mecca and ran over the world from Tangier
to Pekin and from Turkestan to Timbuktu. My fourth was a very son of
the glowing age of Julius II, the first European Christian on record
to reach Mecca, one who outstripped the Portuguese in reaching the
aromatic islands of the Banda Sea. In each case, there is a brief
historical foreword to give the pilgrim due introduction into his
proper setting.

  WILLIAM BOULTING.




I.—HIUEN-TSIANG.

MASTER OF THE LAW; AND HIS PERILOUS JOURNEY TO THE SACRED LAND OF
BUDDHA, A.D. 627–643.




CHAPTER I. THE ISOLATION OF CHINA


For thousands of years China was a world to itself, cut off from the
races of men. The main causes of this singular seclusion are simple:—

China was protected from serious invasion by her geographical position.
Northward, it was no easy business for the barbarous intruder to find a
way into China from the Manchurian plain, or for a Chinaman to find a
way out; and it was still more difficult to effect a passage by force.
To the North-West rose the forbidding walls of the Altai Mountains;
and, between them and China, a broad and demon-haunted waste of sand
blocked the way. Westward, huge interlocked ranges of Central Asia—the
Thian Shan and Pamirs—mountains which o’er top Alp or Caucasus, which
rival the loftiest Andes, and which are inferior only to Himalaya,
presented perils in abundance. These difficulties surmounted, the
vast, trackless sands of Gobi formed a second barrier; and the steep
rocks of Ala-Shan and In-Shan were a third. To the South-West rose the
plateau of Thibet, interlocking with the Pamirs—a plateau with a mean
level of more than 12,000 feet, terminating southward in Himalaya, that
highest and broadest of mountain-walls. To the South of China were the
dense forests, deep valleys, and rapid rivers of Burma and Tonquin.
Eastward the Celestial Empire was guarded by the sea: to reach China
from India was a long and perilous voyage; and the boldest navigator
might hesitate to entrust his clumsy craft to the caprice of the Indian
Ocean, to thread his way through the tortuous straits of Malaysia, and
to chance an encounter with the fierce islanders who lined them, only
in the end to reach a jealous shore. The unwieldly Chinese junk—a
town afloat—did, however, make a periodic and prolonged voyage—at
least in later days—to India; and a few bands of bold, hardy traders
were wont to cross over the formidable passes of Central Asia on
horses, mules, or asses, and to traverse vast, trackless wastes on
camels. They exchanged the products of India, Persia, and those States
which were watered by the classic streams of Oxus and Jaxartes, for the
silks and manufactures of Cathay. Chinese porcelain has been found in
Egyptian tombs.

China enjoyed a soil so productive of every kind of wealth that she was
independent of commercial intercourse with other lands. Secure from all
invaders but the scattered hordes of Mongolia, she developed a high and
distinctive civilization, which became more and more fixed and rigid,
but was superior in many respects to that of other Eastern States. By
the Seventh Century of our Era, good roads, good inns, and an admirable
system of canals rendered internal communication easy; the heavens had
been surveyed by astronomical instruments of some precision; and the
art of printing, which had not then been discovered long, was in use;
although to this day the Chinese do without the valuable economy of an
alphabet.

Moreover the Chinese People preferred to be undisturbed by stimulus
from without. Yet China transmitted her culture to her near and less
civilized neighbours—Japan and the Indo-Chinese peninsula—and claimed
a precarious overlordship of semi-barbarous Manchuria, Mongolia,
Eastern Turkestan and Thibet. During a long stretch of time, the
powerful and jealous Persian Empire was a bar to intercourse with the
far West; because it tried to preserve a monopoly of its own products.

The records of early intercourse with other countries are few; and
those few are meagre. Thirteen centuries before the age in which
Hiuen-Tsiang lived, Embassies from distant nations would seem to
have reached China. Marcus Aurelius despatched a mission (A.D. 166)
to establish direct relations; it travelled by way of India; and
failed. Carus sent another (A.D. 284). At the close of the fourth
century, Ammianus Marcellinus knew of the Chinese as a people dwelling
on fertile plains enclosed by protecting mountains: “a frugal folk,
studying to live peacefully and shunning intercourse with the rest of
mankind.” Half a century later, Moses the Armenian spoke of them as
“dwelling in wealth and civility at the end of the earth; a people
worthy to be called not merely the friends of peace but of life.”
Until the Great Age of Discovery arrived as a novel development of the
Great Age of the Renaissance to derange and remodel the earth, Cathay
was little more than a name to European ears: before the Nineteenth
Century, the Celestial Empire remained undisturbed by the Modern World.

Although the Chinese Government was always persistently obstructive to
foreign intercourse, it took an interest in foreign religions. This
seeming paradox was due to the fact that Confucianism, the official
Faith, was essentially a body of moral precepts, as was Taoism, (albeit
Taoism had stronger pretension to metaphysic), and both people and
rulers were eager to receive any moral doctrine which might strengthen
that love of peace and orderly conduct which would seem to be inborn
in the Chinese breast. There was no _odium theologicum_ in China. Now,
Buddhism was essentially an ethical system, and had much in common with
Taoism. On the whole, the Chinese were eager to adopt it; especially
as becoming a good Buddhist did not disallow of one’s remaining a good
Confucian, or of reconciling Buddhistic and Taoistic speculation. The
Chinese government naturally sanctioned a creed fitted to keep a people
quiet and submissive; and Buddhism proved to be peculiarly suited to
the Chinese mind: it touched the Chinese heart and left a profound
effect on Chinese character.

It had to compete with other religions. For with the caravan of the
trader came many religious Zealots, such as the Fire-Worshippers of
Persia. At the very beginning of Mohammedanism, Wahd-Abi-Kabha, the
maternal uncle of the Prophet, reached China, bearing presents to the
Emperor; and Mohammedans were to be found there in the third decade
of Hiuen-Tsiang’s life; while, in the following decade, Nestorian
missionaries introduced Christianity, which, after due examination, an
Imperial Decree declared to be a satisfactory and permissible faith.
Buddhist missionaries carried the teaching of Gautama to China at a
period not yet ascertained; but it must have lost much of its early
purity by whatever time that may have been.




CHAPTER II.

BUDDHA AND BUDDHISM.


Gautama was the son of a petty chieftain, who exercised limited
authority in a district which lay north of Faîzâbâd. He lived about 600
years before the beginning of the Christian era—about the time when
Jerusalem fell to Nebuchadnezzar and Assyria to the Medes. The evils of
disease, old age, and death weighed on the melancholy mind of the young
princelet: he sought for some way of escape from the curse of craving
flesh and the wild delirium of desire. He abandoned wife and family;
and dwelt, at first, in the solitude of a jungle. At this time, his
life was one of pure contemplation. Then a wave of love for humanity
and profound grief at human suffering swept over him. He resumed the
active life, preaching a pure religion of duty and affection along the
valley of the Ganges; for his soul, like the soul of Plato’s poet, “was
no longer within him.” He had learned and he taught that the misery of
Being is mitigated by strict obedience to the Law of human kindness and
duty. He made stirring appeals to heart and conscience, and supported
his mission by the ancient doctrine of Kharma, which Brâhmans had
taught him—the doctrine that the action of the evil will, barren as
its fruits invariably prove for the living agent, is delayed, but not
destroyed, by death, and builds up a new body and mind, which reap the
bitter harvest of former transgression and also the weal which results
from former well-doing. The heart achieves blessedness in proportion
to its purification; a good life acquires merit, by means of which
relative freedom is obtained from the mournful, malevolent turnings
of the “wheel of things.” Completely purified, Nirvâna (which is
sometimes interpreted as nescience, sometimes as the supra-conscious),
peace in the very heart of things, is obtained. All men may be touched
by love; but only rare intelligencies will seek Nirvâna. For the way
to the Blessed Life is steep and beset with thorns; but the resolute
spirit may achieve increasing and even perfect tranquillity by
uprooting every germ of ill-will and trampling down every one of those
passions of mind or body the results of which are as futile as their
origin is senseless. Gautama accepted the institution of the cloister
then, for such men of high intelligence as sought the truly spiritual.
In time Buddhistic monasticism became divided into the system of the
“Lesser Vehicle”—an ascetic scheme of discipline,—and that of the
“Greater Vehicle” for richer and more metaphysical minds. The first
aimed at restraint; the second, at contemplation. Buddha had no regard
for caste; and this brought his teaching into conflict with that of
the Brâhmans; he promised no endless personal life in heaven—only
progressive release from the evils of temporal existence; he did not
interfere with the popular worship of gods. His doctrine was an appeal
to our more spiritual nature, and closely resembles the Sermon on the
Mount. It awakened a people bound by a system of lifeless forms framed
by a priestly caste, yet who were all athirst for living waters.

But Buddhism speedily became metaphysical in the metaphysical East.
Some of the convents grew into abodes of speculation and seminaries of
learning. It was held that Gautama was the latest of those Buddhas,
those “redeemers” of the world, into whose mother’s womb Bôdhisattva,
the spirit about to become a Buddha, descended spiritually. Yet the
purest teaching of the Spirit contains within itself the seeds of its
own decay: the germ of fulfilment is also the germ of dissolution.
The history of Buddhism strikingly illustrates the truth of this, its
own tenet. Before long the new Faith, like unto Brâhmanism, became
half-throttled by formalism and encrusted by all manner of ridiculous
legend and vulgar superstition. And Asôka, who usurped a throne and
established an Empire at Magadha, near Behar (in the 3rd century before
Christ?) embodied the ethics of Buddhism in formal ordinances. The
letter and not the spirit, of the Law prevailed. But Asôka sent forth
missionaries, East and West and North and South, and they reached far
distant lands.

Probably imperfect and infrequent relations between Chinese Buddhists
and Indian priests were maintained through the medium of caravans
of trade. These have left no record; but in A.D. 65, the Chinese
Authorities sent envoys to Sind by the long, painful, and perilous
overland route. They returned with an Indian priest, sacred writings,
and sacred images of Buddha. After this, an occasional embassy from
India arrived; but such missions soon came to an end, although a
little intercourse was kept up with Ceylon by means of an arduous and
dangerous voyage. Not until the fourth century were Chinamen allowed
to become Buddhist priests. Then, at once, monasteries sprang up all
over the country. About the year 400 Fa-Hian and others with him were
sent on an embassy to secure religious writings. They made their
difficult way through Central Asia. Fa-Hian alone returned, after 14
years absence, by way of Ceylon, bearing authentic scripture with him.
A hundred years later Sung-Yun became a pilgrim to the same end and
was successful in securing a hundred and seventy volumes. Gautama,
like Jesus, had taught by word of mouth only. His manner was to utter
some pithy precept, and then to develop it in a running commentary.
But his disciples recorded these precious words; and, from time to
time, expositions and doctrinal developments and marvellous fables
were added. Of these, the earlier were written in Pali; the later
in Sanskrit, even then a dead tongue, knowledge of which was the
privilege of a small learned class. These Buddhistic writings, made on
prepared palm-leaves, were regarded by the faithful with superstitious
reverence; and Chinese Buddhists were anxious to obtain complete and
accurate copies of them, as well as sacred images and relics of Buddha,
which might serve as the objects of deep veneration.

At no period has the disordered tragedy of human history been more
cataclysmic than in the early part of the Seventh Century after Christ.
The whole world was then a theatre of wild unrest and stupendous
change, little as one fragment of the human race might know of aught
but its own disasters or triumphs. The shattered edifice of the
Roman Empire of the West was run over by Lombard, Frank and Goth and
races still more barbarous than these. From Cheviot to Illyricum,
all was confused, bloody, and unceasing riot. The exceptional vigour
of Heraclius alone saved the Roman Empire of the East from the
ever-watchful and now advancing hosts of Persia; while a new and
wholly unexpected menace arose in the Arabian desert: there a peril
burst forth as abrupt, fierce and overwhelming as a sandstorm of that
rocky waste. For Mohammed and his followers advanced thence with fiery
and resistless speed to offer the nations choice between the Koran,
tribute, and the sword. Even distant, tranquil China, the land cut off
from the rest of mankind was parturient: the Empire had broken up, and
was contended for by vulturine feudatories, who fought together for
sole possession of its bleeding carcase. A new and strong dynasty arose
amid slaughter and desolation. But, for a time, Central China was hell
let loose. The adolescence of Hiuen-Tsiang was passed amid scenes of
death and dismay.




CHAPTER III.

AN ADVENTUROUS JOURNEY.


This boldest of pilgrims, greatest of Chinese travellers came into the
world A.D. 603—nearly twelve hundred years after the founder of his
faith. He was the fourth son of a Chinese Professor in the Province
of Ho-nan, in Central China. Probably he shewed mental ability and a
devotional spirit early; for the second of his elder brethren took him
into his own monastery at Lo-Yang, the Eastern Capital, to supervise
his education. The boy is said to have evinced such brilliant parts and
such a spiritual mind that he became a novice at what would seem, at
that time, to have been the exceptionally early age of thirteen years;
although, two centuries before, Fa-Hian was a novice at three! It was
soon after this event that revolution shook the ancient Empire, and
came near to disrupt it. China became a slaughter-house, and Buddhist
priests were murdered as well as Government Officials.

As certain saints bear witness, the passion that wings its flight
towards no earthly home is occasionally combined with bold and
efficient direction of mundane life. It was so combined in
Hiuen-Tsiang. The monk of perfervid faith gave early proof that he was
a lad of mettle as well as an enthusiast for the Greater Vehicle. In
resolution and spirit, he dominated his elder brother, and insisted on
their both setting off, in the teeth of peril, for a safer place in the
Eastern province of Sz-chuen; and here he ended his novitiate and was
fully ordained at the age of twenty.

At last, chaos within the Chinese frontier and warfare along it began
to yield to the military genius and state-craft of T’ai-Tsung, the
greatest of Chinese warriors and rulers. Hiuen-Tsiang was not slow
to avail himself of the return of some measure of tranquillity to
the State. He disobeyed monastic authority, joined a band of nomadic
traders, and visited convent after convent of the wide Empire, with the
purpose of clearing his mind, in debate with their inmates, concerning
difficult problems in scriptural scholarship and the precise import
of certain tenets of his faith. There was full scope for speculative
discussion, since Chinese Buddhists did not yet possess a complete set
of the Sacred Writings or of the Buddhist Fathers and workers in that
kind of suggestive fiction which is so often taken to be veritable
history and which becomes the wardrobe of moral truth. Much was, as
yet, unsettled by authority and lay open to dispute.

Dissatisfied by the indefinite results of controversy, and fired by
the records of previous pilgrims, the young monk resolved to make for
the cradle and sanctuary of Buddhism and to seek there for the books
which his countrymen lacked. He and a few ardent monks applied to
the newly-established Emperor for permission to do this. The monarch
was Kao-T’sou, first of the T’ang dynasty—that most famous of the
many Imperial lines of China—the glory of having founded which
rests with his son, the redoubtable T’ai-Tsung, whom, later on, we
shall find seated on his father’s throne. The request was made at
an inopportune time, and was refused. For monkdom did not stand in
court-favour just then; monks were ordered to marry; possibly, because
recent internecine strife had thinned the population; possibly, also,
because the new government was jealous, in a perilous time, of the
power of growing sacerdotalism. This prohibition put an end to the
hope of Hiuen-Tsiang’s coadjutors: it only increased his own ardour
and hardened his own resolve. He was now 24 years of age; therefore in
the full vigour of early manhood; he cared nothing for obedience to
constituted authority when constituted authority stood in the way of
spiritual enlightenment. And he was not merely filled with religious
enthusiasm: the restless force and curiosity of youth were his; there
were shrewd, observant eyes in his head as well as disciplined wits.
Here was a man anxious and fitted to observe the physical features,
governments, productions, and peculiarities of unknown countries and to
record them. Westward, beyond the setting sun, lay mysterious lands,
vague as a dream, yet to be found a reality in this so wondrous world.
There was a call from afar. When the spirit of one born for action is
all a fire with enthusiasm begotten of idea, let the world keep watch!

It would appear from Tao-Sun, a Chinese author contemporary with
Hiuen-Tsiang, that there were three routes from China to India—the
one which our traveller took; the one by which he returned; and a
third from Lake Lob-nor, over the thousand miles of terrible plateau
in Thibet and the Himalayas to Nepal. Before long Hiuen Tsiang was
at Liang-chau, the capital of the province of Lan-su, far beyond the
upper reaches of the great Yellow River, and nearly at the extreme
north-western limit of China Proper. Here were gathered merchants
from Thibet and other far-distant lands; and these were so impressed
by Hiuen-Tsiang’s fervour and the grandeur of his project that they
are said to have cast themselves at his feet. They provided him with
ample means to go on. Now, Chinese administration in the province of
Lan-su had only been established recently, and remained insecure; no
inhabitant was allowed to cross the frontier; and the Governor was
a strong man who rigorously enforced his regulations. But what are
the strongest bonds of any mere narrow national group against the
conflicting obligation of Moral or Ideal impulse? How can usage and
prescription and enactment prevail against more spiritual forces?
Our would-be pilgrim secured the aid of a friendly monk, and stole
out of the city by night, accompanied by two young novices. The trio
stealthily, yet rapidly, pursued their course each night; they crept
furtively into some hiding place before each dawn. By the time this
evasive noctambulation had brought them to Kwa-chau, more than a
hundred miles north-east of Liang-chau, Hiuen-Tsiang’s horse was dead.
There was small comfort in learning that he would have to cross a river
so turbulent that no boat could live on it; that, beyond the river,
was an entrenchment which he must contrive to get over; and that, even
should he overcome this obstacle, the frontier was closed by rings of
forts; beyond the forts there was a vast stretch of herbless, waterless
waste; and beyond this desert lay the land of a Turkish people—those
Uïghurs, who appear in European folk-lore as the terrible Ogres.

His heart sank within him; the melancholy which seized him lasted a
whole month, and his taciturnity made it apparent. The Imperial Veto
arrived at Kwa-chau; the Governor of the city sent him a summons to
appear. But this new blow roused his failing courage; he pulled himself
together; personality and enthusiasm prevailed at the interview; the
Governor was won over; Authority gave the pilgrim a hint to lose no
time in making off; and closed its official eye to his departure.

Now, one of the novices was faint-hearted; the other sickly.
Hiuen-Tsiang sent them back. He was anxious to get on his solitary way
as fast as he could; so he bought a new horse; but he lacked a guide.
By a lucky accident he fell in with a “barbarian,” who expressed a
desire to become a monk, and who offered to guide him past the five
successive forts which lay ahead, and which he must somehow contrive to
dodge. The “barbarian” also took him to see an ancient trader who had
been to the land of the Uïghurs over thirty times. This old gentleman
made no attempt at reassuring him. “The routes of the West are rough
and dangerous,” he said, “now, one is stopped by shifting sands; now,
by demons and scorching winds. Even big caravans are liable to lose
their way and come to a miserable end. How, then, can you hope to
make the journey all by yourself? Be wise, I entreat you, and do not
play with your life.” But the monk answered that he held his life as
nothing when set against his holy quest. The old trader then dropped
vain arguments and proposed a deal which should be mutually profitable:
he would take the horse which Hiuen-Tsiang had bought, and would
give him his own Rosinante, which had made the journey so often, and
therefore must remember the road. The pilgrim, when he saw the beast,
recalled how one skilled in occult science had once spoken to him of an
ancient steed, reddish of colour, with a varnished saddle and an iron
framework to it; and lo! was not the very steed before him? He closed
the bargain; and he and the barbarian set forth together, each on his
“mount.”

The twain came up to the river (the Bulunghir) and found a place where
there were narrows. The guide proved himself to be resourceful: he made
a sort of bridge of boughs, covered them with sand, and belaboured the
horses until they dashed across the frail structure. A strange way of
crossing an unfordable stream! but by no means so improbable as it
sounds. It is said to be still used in Central Asia.

Night drew on. Both men were weary, and spread their mats for sleep.
But Hiuen-Tsiang placed small confidence in his guide. They lay fifty
paces apart. And, before long, our hero heard a stealthy footfall and
saw the dim outline of the half-savage stalking up to him. With drawn
sword, too! He sprang up, and breathed a prayer; whereupon the guide
returned to his own mat, stretched himself out, and straightway fell
asleep. Had he meant evil? or did he wish to make off if he found the
pilgrim asleep? or was his desire to frighten him from pursuing a
journey so perilous to them both?

Next morning, being already within the verge of the desert, they ate
sparingly, but were lucky enough to find water. No more water would
be found until they reached close up to the first fort; and they must
steal this by night; for, once espied by the garrison, they might
count themselves dead men. The guide tried to work on our pilgrim to
give up such a mad enterprise. But Hiuen-Tsiang knew no shadow of
turning; so the twain, ears and eyes wide open, wormed they way over
the rough tackless waste. Suddenly the guide tightened his bow and bade
Hiuen-Tsiang go on in front. Our pilgrim was far too wary a person to
do anything of the kind; he was by no means satisfied as to the designs
of the half-civilized stranger. However, the barbarian quietly resumed
his duty as scout; but he displayed such a desire to be out of it all,
and his fears were so obviously growing, that Hiuen-Tsiang dismissed
him with a present of the horse he rode.

Behold our traveller, then, solitary on the unending, pathless desert
of Gobi—one of the most immense of Earth’s waste places,—eagerly
on the look out for such heaps of bleached bones as might mark the
track of some caravan. After some time of slow, painful progress,
he beheld a band of men wearing glittering armour and bearing their
banners unfurled; they were making for him, but vanished as suddenly as
they appeared. It was the mirage come to perplex and delude him. One
illusion followed another in rapid succession; fleeting, dissolving
scenes which were the works of the Devil. But a voice said to him:
“Fear not.” This brought comfort, and his fear departed. He pushed on,
and in the end he sighted the watch-tower. He hid in a sand-hollow
until night closed round, and then he crept up to the wall of the fort
and found the hoped-for water. He was busy filling his leathern-bottle,
when an arrow whizzed by and very nearly hit him; and a second arrow
followed. He shouted out: “Stop your shooting. I am a monk from the
Capital.” Soldiers ran up, dragged him into the fort, and took him
before their captain. He produced papers which proved his identity,
and was treated with the respect due to a priest of Buddha; yet the
Captain urged him to return home. Finding the pilgrim to be a man of
heroic piety and inflexible will, he set out with him and guided him
some distance along the way to the next fort. He even gave Hiuen-Tsiang
a message to its captain, recommending the pilgrim to his favour and
assistance. But the message was a verbal one only. And Hiuen-Tsiang was
not sure that he might not find more rigour and less charity at the
next watch-tower; so, when he came up to it, he crept furtively towards
its base, in search of water as before. The dispatch of an arrow was
sufficient warning; he came into the open, and the scene at the first
fort was re-enacted. He repeated the message to its Captain; and this
second officer gave him hospitable entertainment and better advice. For
he urged him to avoid the third fort, which was held by rough soldiery,
who would not be nice in making delicate distinctions and might easily
become violent. And he directed him to take a route which avoided this
fort altogether, and along which, at ten leagues distance, he would
come across sweet water.

He set off across the arid plain, where was neither beast nor bird to
be seen, nor blade of grass, nor any sign of moisture—only mirage. A
pandemonium of fantastic forms encircled him; forms begotten of the
Power of Evil. But he felt secure in the midst of devils; for did he
not bear, folded in his bosom, a sure talisman—none other than a
Sacred Manuscript, the gift of grateful leper to whom he had stood as a
friend?

Illusory peril was followed by solid disaster: he dropped his
water-bottle and spilled its precious contents. Next, his horse lost
its way, and made the same long circuit again and again. For a moment,
he was tempted to assay a return to the fort: he brushed the thought
aside, turned his horse’s head to the North-West, and pushed on.

Night came on. Evil spirits seized on the opportunity to close in on
him. Every demon bore a burning torch. They were more in multitude than
the stars of heaven. Four horrid nights, filled with hallucination,
wore away. Four days he struggled on, tortured by thirst, his body one
ache. At last horse and rider fell to the ground, worn out. Death was
close at hand when a refreshing night-breeze swept over the desert,
and horse and rider renewed the struggle. Suddenly, the horse insisted
on taking his own way: he had scented water; and soon a little oasis
was reached. It was uninhabited; but a day’s rest there refreshed man
and beast; and, on the third day, the traveller saw the last of the
shifting sands of Shamo and came to the pastures of the Uïghurs.

In the capital, probably identical with the town now known as Hâmî, he
found a Buddhist monastery, wherein dwelt three Chinese monks. He had
already made fully 600 miles from Liang-chau; but that was as nothing
to the journey which lay before him; and from this he was compelled to
digress. For he was in a region tributary to the ruler of Kau-chang
(Turfan) and this monarch, having heard of his arrival, ordered that
he should be sent on to him. Six days of travel to the West, through
a desert, brought him to Turfan. The Lord-paramount of the Uïghurs
received him with all honour and much state-ceremony. He sat under
a “canopy of precious stuffs” pitched in the courtyard of a palace.
Soon after the pilgrim’s arrival, the queen, accompanied by her suite,
appeared; but Hiuen-Tsiang being fatigued, their Majesties retired to
the “palace,” and he was conducted to his chamber, where eunuchs served
and guarded him. Next day he was taken to a Buddhist convent, still in
the custody of the eunuchs. For the monarch had resolved to keep such a
holy person for the better instruction of his subjects.

Hiuen-Tsiang incurred the royal displeasure by stoutly refusing to do
as he was bid and stay on. Then ensued, in that far away time and half
barbaric land, the ancient and ever recurrent struggle which history
so copiously illustrates—the contest between regnant authority and
the claims of religion. At one time the despot tried to brow-beat; at
another time, to cajole; he even put aside his dignity and offered
to serve the monk at table. Both men were equally resolute; and the
situation seemed hopeless, when Hiuen-Tsiang bethought him of an
expedient with which we moderns became familiar at no very recent
date. He started to hunger-strike. In four days the result of this
policy alarmed the King. The queen-mother declared herself for the holy
pilgrim, and the monarch gave in. He begged that Hiuen-Tsiang would at
least stay in the country during one short month. The monk accepted the
compromise; and in that single month his unaffected piety, passionate
singleness of aim and personal attraction did the work they never
failed to accomplish everywhere and on every occasion. Moral intensity
was the secret of his success.

And so we see the poor wanderer who came to Uïghur-land alone,
famished, and half dead, leaving the land under the protection of an
armed escort, and provided, not merely with an ample supply of warm
clothing for the heights he must cross, but with 100 ounces of gold,
30,000 pieces of silver and 500 pieces of satin for the presents
which were necessary and to pay his way. He was also given letters of
recommendation to the Princes of the West. Monks and the population of
the city followed him beyond its gates; and the despot, having sent the
queen and people back, conducted him surrounded by his whole court,
some miles on his journey.

The route lay westward, over a difficult, mountainous land. Southward
lay the Tarim, a considerable river, which discharges itself into
Lob-nor, one of the numerous inland salt-seas of Asia, for ever
rising and falling and shifting its boundaries. It was well that the
pilgrim had a military escort; for a band of brigands lurked among the
mountains. They were probably quite as strong as the Uïghur soldiery;
for negotiations were entered into, and ended in their being bought
off. A little farther on there was ghastly evidence that these
ruffians had recently attacked and destroyed a caravan of traders: a
few score corpses lay stretched out on the ground.

When Kara-shahr (Karshâr) was reached, its King behaved courteously,
but refused to grant fresh horses, by reason of the frequent raiding of
his domain by the Uïghurs. He was disquieted by the presence of Uïghur
soldiery. Hiuen-Tsiang tells us, among much else that is interesting,
that the coinage here was of gold, silver and copper,—that there
were ten Buddhist monasteries of the Lesser Vehicle; that these were
properly kept, but that the country “had no annals” and that “the laws
were not settled. The people clothe themselves in cotton or wool, and
go about with their scalps shorn and uncovered.”

The separate account of each country the pilgrim visited or concerning
which he believed he had credible information—his great monumental
work—the _Si-yu-ki_—begins with Kara-shahr which he calls Akni
or Agni. One is at once struck with the exactness of the author’s
observation, the orderliness of his mind, and the minute precision of
his statement. One is equally astounded at his oriental love of the
marvellous and his eager haste to record every grotesque and absurd
legend. There is before us a man as full as any modern explorer of
ardent zeal for travel, eager curiosity, keen eye, and quick interest
in all that is novel and peculiar. There is the same intellectual grasp
of the natural features, products and government of strange countries.
But Hiuen-Tsiang’s inmost, burning passion is revealed both in this
book and in the biography compiled from his documents and discourse
by two pupils and intimate friends Hwui-Lih and Yen-Tsong[1]: it was
for all that appertained to his religion, whether sacred writing or
Buddhist monuments or the relics of saints. When he deals with mundane
matters he rarely goes astray. And, from his earliest years, he bore a
sacred flame, a consuming fire in his breast, fed by the highest and
holiest emotions and aspirations of man. But, although he breathed the
breath of life, the purest atmosphere of the East in his century was
tainted by superstition. The mental disposition for the marvellous,
implanted in him at a tender age, and sustained by precept and example,
waxed with the years. The absurdest legends became credible if they
bore the name of his faith. This close observer, this clear minded
man became passionate for prodigies, had a Gargantuan swallow for the
superstitious-grotesque. Brought up on legend, he soon found himself in
a home of fable. He records every marvellous tale which is told him,
and worships at every shrine which guards any relic of wonder. And this
although he was not wanting in passion for orderly thinking.

News from Kara-shahr that a holy pilgrim, bound for India, might be
expected reached the next Kingdom, and he found monks standing to greet
him at the gate of Kutchê, its capital. Feelings of simple grace and
beauty dwelt in those Eastern hearts; they welcomed him with a gift
of flowers. But the strict laws of his order did not permit of his
accepting these for himself. He placed them before an image of Buddha,
Teacher of the Law. Kutchê was a land of music, its people excelling
all others on the lute and pipe. They were a wholly honest folk,
with an incompetent ruler. “The King’s wisdom being small,” says our
Chinaman, “he is ruled by a private minister. The heads of children of
the humbler order are flattened by the pressure of a wooden board”;
which recalls the custom of certain North American Indians. The King
had ordered a banquet to honour his visitor; but the strictness of the
rule which Hiuen-Tsiang followed forbade him to be present. This cast
the potentate into a mighty rage; but once again the simplicity and
sincerity of the pilgrim’s character, which glowed in his countenance,
disarmed wrath. He was retained at Kutchê, an honoured guest, until
such time as the snows should melt. He spent two months there, chiefly
occupied in religious discussion with the monks. He tells us that the
monarch and his ministers met together once a month to discuss matters
of state, and consulted the priests before publishing their decrees.

When the season ripened and the ways became open once more, he was sent
forth in magnificent pomp and protection; he was accompanied by an
armed escort and a staff of servants, all mounted on camels and horses.
The escort was very necessary; for a great horde of Turkish robbers
were passed on the way, quarrelling about the booty of a caravan which
they had stopped and plundered. A march of about 120 miles brought
our party to a small desert which they crossed over, and so entered
the domain of another Khân. A single night was spent at what is now
Bai, where he found Buddhist monasteries, and the party pushed across
another small desert. The towering and forbidding ranges of Thian-shan
were before them, “very dangerous and reaching up to the sky.” Indeed
Khân Tengri, the highest mountain of the range, has an elevation of
24,000 feet. The imposing features of the mountain-masses and the
horror of the passes across them left indelible marks on Hiuen-Tsiang’s
memory. “Since the creation of the world,” he says, “the snow has
gathered there and become frozen blocks, which spring and summer cannot
melt. Shining sheets of solid ice spread before one, and there is, as
it were, no end to them; they blend with the clouds. Frozen splinters
have become detached and have fallen; some of these are an hundred
feet high; others measure some dozens of feet athwart, and they bar
the way. You attempt to climb over the former kind at your peril; you
get across the latter with pain. And all the time tempest assails
you with gusts of wind and whirling drifts of snow; so that double
soles to your foot-gear and fur garments to your body fail to keep
out the cold. Of dry shelter there is none, either to feed or sleep
in. You have to sling up your cooking-pot and lay your sleeping mat
on the frozen ground.” Mountain-staves were used, and we learn from
the _Si-yu-ki_ (the “Record of Western Countries”) that mountaineers
were accustomed to cut steps in the ice. But to climb uncharted hills,
among the highest of the world, led by guides of no great experience;
to make one’s way over rock and glacier unroped and unprovided with
specially constructed boots; to sleep in the open in rarified and
arctic air; to live on poor food, and often to lack it, was to loathe
the mountain-pass. And this Hiuen-Tsiang did, heartily.

It cost the caravan seven dolorous days to cross the higher ranges,
and, by the time the western uplands were reached, 13 or 14 strong men
had been lost through cold and hunger, and more than double that number
of beasts of burthen.

Beyond the mountains, the uplands of Western Turkestan lie at a higher
level than that reached by Ben Nevis, and they embosom a great inland
sea—the Issyk-Kul, which lies nearly 5,000 feet up. Wending their
way along its southern shore, our travellers ran into a hunting party
of the Khân of the Turks. Only half a century had then passed since
nomadic Turkish tribes possessed themselves of the “thousand sources”
of those two great rivers which lose themselves in the Aral Sea, which
are known to modern geographers as Amu Daria and Syr Daria, and which
readers of the classics know as Oxus and Jaxartes. The Turks speedily
became masters of the fertile plains of Sogdiana and Bactria, subdued
the tribes that occupied the region we call Bokhâra, and extended their
sway into the very heart of the Hindû Kûsh, reaching as far south as
the Kapiśa of the Greeks—that is to say, within a few miles of Kâbul.

We have an interesting account of how the Nomadic Ruler gave the
travellers a gracious reception within a great tent, resplendent with
cloth of gold. Two long rows of dignitaries, clad in figured silks
of many colours, squatted on mats before the Khân; behind him stood
the royal guard. He wore a cloak of green satin; his long hair was
bound over the forehead by several folds of silk, the ends whereof
fell over his back. When on horseback, two hundred captains, gay in
brocade and riding horses with plaited tails, and an army with banners,
spears and long bows accompanied him. This was not foot soldiery;
horses or camels were ridden, and the men were clad in furs and fine
wool. One could see no end to the army, it was such a multitude. Our
author tells us that the Turk of his day worshipped fire, and sat on
mats, since wooden chairs contain the quality of fire. Ten centuries
later Sir Thomas Browne, in his “Urn-Burial” refers to the Parsees
of India “which expose their bodies unto vultures and endure not so
much as _feretra_ or biers of wood, the proper fuel of fire.” A huge
arm-chair, made of iron and covered with a mat was brought in for
the use of Hiuen-Tsiang. The whole party was invited to sit, Turkish
fashion; wine was brought in, cups clinked, and everybody drank, turn
and turn about; while music, which to Chinese ears was barbaric yet
not unpleasing, came from strange instruments. After the wine, legs
and shoulders of boiled mutton and veal were brought in; but the
Buddhist was separately served with “pure food”—rice-cake, cream,
milk, crystallized sugar, honeycomb and grapes. Of course the divine
gadfly which pursued our hero stung him to testify on this occasion, as
on all other opportunities, whether in season or out of season. But his
personality stood him in good stead; moreover, to this day, a holy man
is respected throughout the pagan East, no matter what his faith may
be. The Khân was interested and attentive; even impressed. He raised
his hands towards heaven, cast himself on the ground, kept Hiuen-Tsiang
about his person for some days, and earnestly besought him to give up
his project. “You must not go,” he said. “The country is a very hot
one. You look too frail a man to give hope of your success. The natives
are black; they go about naked; they have no modesty; they are unworthy
of your presence among them.” “Whatever I may be,” replied the Master
of the Law, “I burn with longing to seek for the commands of Buddha,
to inspect the ancient monuments, and to follow lovingly the track of
our Lord’s footpath on earth.” What followed marks yet once more the
personal ascendency of our hero in every situation. This half-savage
head of wild Mongolian hordes sought straightway for some one who knew
Chinese and could also interpret the confusion of tongues in his own
subject-lands to the south. Such a man was speedily picked out of the
Khân’s army; for Chinese had been carried off by the Turkish Hiung-nu
(a people possibly, though by no means certainly, identical with the
terrible Huns whom Attila led to devastate Europe) and had settled down
in towns, deserted when Hiuen-Tsiang arrived in the district, but where
they had kept up their native tongue, although they had adopted Turkish
dress and ways. With true Eastern courtesy to a guest, the great Khân
accompanied our traveller some little way on his journey.

At first the route lay westward towards the “Land of the Thousand
Sources”—a region of lakes and pools, great trees, much vegetation,
and a sweet and wooing air. Hither the Khân was wont to repair in
summer. Still travelling westward, Talas was reached, and then, by
bending round to the South-West and South, Samarkand, the “storehouse
of precious merchandise from many foreign countries.” Our traveller
found the ruler “full of courage, and controlling neighbouring
countries” with his fierce soldiery. He received the pilgrim with an
air of lofty disdain; but Hiuen-Tsiang was not a man to be daunted,
and, next day, when he boldly set forth his faith, contempt became
respect. Buddhism was practically dead in Samarkand. The monasteries
were empty. Two young monks who were with Hiuen-Tsiang sought to pass
the night in one of these vacant buildings; but the populace threw
burning brands at them and drove them out. The King condemned the
offenders to decapitation; but Hiuen-Tsiang pleaded for mercy; so
they were merely beaten and expelled from the city. His successful
intercession increased the fervour of his missionary zeal; nor did he
toil in vain; the monasteries were re-opened; and he ordained priests
to fill them.

Leaving Samarkand, about 90 miles off, he entered a pass bordered by
mountains “of prodigious heighth, with a narrow road” to add “to the
difficulty and danger.” The pass was closed by double wooden doors,
studded with iron, and hung with bells. The pass owed its name—The
Iron Gates—to these strong defences.

The Oxus was reached and crossed, and our pilgrim now deviates
considerably from the direct route to fulfil a promise which he had
made to the Khân of the Uïghurs to visit his son-in-law, the son of
the great Khân of the Turks, who ruled over a little Khânate, called
Hwo, and probably identical with the district which lies east of the
Surkh-âb. When he arrived, he found the monarch on his death-bed; and
was obliged to wait two months until the funeral ceremonies were done
with. During this time a tragedy took place which casts a lurid light
on court-life in Central Asia during the Seventh Century, and which
reminds us of the Italian tragedies during the High Renaissance. The
wife of the Khân had died, and the Khân replaced her by marrying her
young sister. At the instigation of a son by the first marriage, the
bride murders her husband. “The serpent that did sting his father’s
life now wears his crown,” and marries his aunt-step-mother. A similar
atrocity is recorded of the Chinese Imperial family in Hiuen-Tsiang’s
time. In A.D. 655 the Emperor, Kao-Tsung, deposed the Empress and
married one of his father’s widows, who wholly ruled him, cut off
the feet of the Empress, and of another queen, and then had these
unfortunate ladies drowned “like Clarence in his Malmsey-butt,” in a
vat of wine.

Hiuen-Tsiang was fortunate in finding a monk who had dwelt in India and
had studied the Scriptures there; and the twain set forth for Balkh
in some sort of waggon. At Balkh, he found no fewer than a hundred
Buddhist monasteries, three thousand monks, and sacred memorials and
relics beyond count. He might have become very rich; for the Kinglets
around Balkh were eager to secure a visit from such a holy being, and
offered to load him with gold and jewels. But he was not the man to
depart from the straight and narrow path he had chosen. He refused them
one and all, and set forth for ways “even more difficult and dangerous
than the deserts of ice. Every moment one is at battle there with
frozen cloud or snow-whirlwind. Sometimes one is faced with worse than
this, even, namely, morasses of mud, dozens of feet wide. Ice, pile on
pile, rises into mountain masses, snow-blasts dash on for a hundred
leagues.” “The raging spirits and demons of the mountains send every
kind of calamity; and there are murderous robbers to be met with.” Thus
does Hiuen Tsiang describe the passage of the Hindû Kûsh.

At Bâmiyân, in the heart of Afghanistan, a great centre of Buddhism
after the model of the Little Vehicle, he was honourably received by
its ruler and rested five days in his palace. He visited the great
Buddhist images, hewn out of the solid rock (which our soldiers saw
in the Afghan Campaign of 1843) and other remarkable monuments. On
the second day after leaving Bâmiyân, he was caught in a blinding
snowstorm, lost his way, and was like to perish, when mountaineers
who were out hunting came across him and put him on the right track.
A mountain pass brought him to the Kapiśa of Ptolemy and Pliny. It
was situated a little to the north of the present Kâbul. Here “the
people were fierce and cruel speaking a rude tongue, their marriage a
mere intermingling of the sexes.” The monarch, shrewd, brave, firm and
sagacious, had established a little empire by bringing ten neighbouring
States under his overlordship, and had won the love of his subjects.
Hearing of the approach of the pilgrim, this potentate set out to meet
him, accompanied by a procession of monks. These pietists of various
monasteries of the Great and Little Vehicle remained sufficiently
human to quarrel as to which house should shelter so rare a guest. Now
the King was an enthusiastic supporter of the more rigid Order; and
Hiuen-Tsiang would naturally have prepared to take up his abode in a
convent of the Great Vehicle. But the appeal of the monks of a convent
following the Little Vehicle, an appeal made on historic grounds,
touched him; yet one of the monks who had accompanied him showed strong
repugnance to sleep in a house of Hiuen-Tsiang’s rival and stricter
sect. Our Chinese was neither a Courtier nor a Pharisee; he could
“suffer fools gladly,” and took up his abode with the weaker brethren.
Then the rivals had but one voice in entreating him to uncover a
treasure, which had been set aside for the repair of some religious
house, and which lay buried beneath the foot of an image of Buddha.




CHAPTER IV.

THROUGH INDIA IN THE SEVENTH CENTURY.


He passed the wet season at Kapiśa, and then, protected by the King’s
envoys, went along the North bank of the Kâbul river and through
districts memorable in the record of the Indian expedition of Alexander
the Great. Again and again do we come across the names of places
familiar to the reader of Arrian and Strabo. He visited Peshâwar and
Attock; he travelled through many a little Kingdom of what is now
North-Eastern Afghanistan and the North-West Provinces of India, by
zig-zag and perplexing routes. Here was the classic soil of ancient
Brâhmanism; here was to be found many a Buddhist record of the great
days of Aśôka. It was a land of monasteries and monuments, of countless
_stûpas_ (monuments containing relics) and sculptured stones, of
ancient tradition and extravagant myth. The recording carvings of ages
still stood thick on the ground or lay there in ruin. He saw every one
of them, traversing perilous ravines by the help of chains affixed to
the rocks; crossing frail swaying bridges made of rope. He got as far
north as Baltistân, or Little Thibet, “in the midst of the Great Snowy
Mountains.” More than six centuries later, Marco Polo refers to the
inhabitants as “an evil race of savage idolaters,” and Hiuen-Tsiang
found their forefathers “fierce, passionate folk, ill-mannered, and of
uncouth speech.” “Strictly speaking, they do not belong to India, but
are rude frontier-folk.” Sometimes the ways were deserted; for brigands
were abroad. Almost everywhere Brâhmanism was in the ascendent;
Buddhism in decay; but, as yet, the rivalry of the two creeds had
nowhere become acute; rival religionists behaved kindly and courteously
one to another; and Brâhmans received the traveller with generous
hospitality. Yet the careful student will not fail to observe that the
antagonism between Brâhman and Buddhist, which is evident in the pages
of Fa-Hien, had not decreased in the two centuries since his time. For
Exoteric Brâhmanism, with its clever adaptation of the ancient gods of
India; its appeal to the imagination of the vulgar, always concrete
in character and incapable of comprehending an abstract proposition;
its deities, embodying human passion and evoking human sympathies; its
support of human pride in the institution of caste; its intercessory
priesthood and vicarious sacrifice; and its supple manipulation of
men to obtain power, was on the high road to revival. But there is an
esoteric Brâhmanism, as Macaulay found out, always the lofty, pure
creed of the educated Hindu.

Hiuen-Tsiang went up and down and to and fro in these frontier-states,
threading many a delicious valley which nestled among the mountains
and was overlooked by the snows of Himalaya; and returning from time
to time to the more enervating atmosphere of the valley of the Indus.
The King of Kaśmîr (Cashmir) visited him at a monastery where he was
staying, preceded by a brilliant procession. The roadway was covered
with umbrellas and banners; it was carpeted with flowers, and the
air was filled with sweet scents. The monarch was full of compliment
and shows of respect, and scattered a great quantity of flowers in
Hiuen-Tsiang’s honour. Then he begged him to take his seat on a great
elephant. And he walked behind him. The pilgrim remained two years
in Kasmîr, sitting at the feet of a sage, studying Sanskrit and the
Buddhist scriptures. Indeed, throughout all his travels, he was forever
studying or collecting or transcribing manuscripts, when he was not
visiting and venerating relics.

Now near Nagarahâra, in the district of Jalâlâbâd, there was a certain
cavern, where, peradventure, the pious might behold the shadow which
Buddha had cast on its walls. It had been granted to Sung-Yun to see
it, when the Empress Dowager of a Tartar dynasty which ruled in
Northern China sent him and another on an embassy to obtain Buddhist
books (A.D. 518); and Hiuen-Tsiang was consumed by desire to see it
also. His escort from Kapiśa earnestly begged him not to make the
attempt; it was a rash and perilous project; brigands were abroad; and
few indeed were those who might see the holy vision. They could not
dissuade him; so they left him and went home, and he took an old man as
guide. When he got near the cavern five brigands pounced upon him. He
pointed to his monks’ robe and told them that, if they were brigands,
they were none the less men, and he had no fear of men, or even of wild
beasts, when sacred duty called him. He touched their hearts, and they
let him go.

Although a man visited by visions and a dreamer of significant dreams,
he spent a long time in the cave and saw nothing. Prostrations and
convictions of sin were in vain. Then, quite suddenly, came a flash
of light; thereupon he vowed that he would not quit the spot until
he should behold the veritable shade. In the end the reward of such
persistent enthusiasm was bestowed: he beheld the Buddha, attended by
his sacred court, in all their heavenly splendour. But, just then,
torch-bearers came into the cave, intending to burn perfumes in the
holy place, and the glory disappeared. Hiuen-Tsiang ordered them to
put out their lights, and lo! there was the vision as before. Five
of the six torch-bearers declared that they beheld the shadow. It is
characteristic of our pilgrim that he is careful to tell us that the
sixth man saw nothing whatever. Never a shadow of doubt arises as to
his good faith. Sung-Yun the Chinese ambassador and pilgrim, writing
an account of his journey a hundred years before Hiuen-Tsiang, tells
us how, “Entering the mountain cavern fifteen feet and looking for a
long time (or, at a long distance?) at the western side of it, opposite
the entrance, at length, the figure, with its characteristic marks,
appears; on going nearer to look at it, it gradually grows fainter,
and then disappears. On touching the place where it was with the hand,
there is nothing but the bare wall. Gradually retreating, the figure
begins to come into view again, and foremost is conspicuous that
peculiar mark between the eyebrows, which is so rare among men.” And
Hiuen-Tsiang tells us, in his “Records of Western Lands,” that in later
days the shadow has faded to a feeble likeness, although, by fervent
prayer, it may be clearly seen, “though not for long.”

Leaving the North-Western corner of India, he now proceeded through the
Punjâb. Many a city he names has perished, and not a stone thereof is
left; of others a few stones mark the seat of departed greatness; but
often the names recall the Embassy of Megasthenes and differ but little
from those by which they were known to the Greeks of a yet earlier age.

He had left certain rude tribes behind him, yet he found particular
districts by no means free from murderous gangs; and he had to traverse
many a forest inhabited by wild elephants and great beasts of prey. In
one forest, he and fellow-monks who accompanied him found themselves at
the mercy of half a hundred armed brigands, who chased them into the
bed of a pond which had run dry. Hiuen-Tsiang and some others contrived
to hide among thorny bushes and coarse growth; but some of the company
were caught and bound. Happily a hollow, scooped out by escaping
waters, was hit upon; and our pilgrim and some who were in hiding
contrived to make their way out. About half a mile off they came across
a Brâhman ploughing with oxen; and he took them to a village hard
by. He blew a conch and beat a drum, and soon 80 men of the village
snatched up their arms and gathered together to attack the robbers.
These latter, seeing so many bounding towards them, made off with all
speed; the villagers found and released their captives, who lay bound,
stripped, and quite helpless, groaning and weeping many tears. The
good people of the village covered their nakedness and took them to
their homes for food and shelter. “Master,” said one of the monks, to
Hiuen-Tsiang, “all that we had has been taken by the thieves, and we
have barely got off with our lives. How is it you can smile and look so
cheerful!” “Because life is man’s greatest boon,” was the reply. “When
that has been saved, why vex one’s self over clothes and food?”

Soon we are with Hiuen-Tsiang at a centre of Brâhmanism which was
probably Lâhôr (Lahore). Everywhere he is received with courtesy;
usually welcomed with procession and pageantry. Before very long, we
find him making a long détour to the cold upper valley of the Bujas
river, under the Himalayas, and among a rude, hard, fierce race, but
one that had a regard for justice as well as for courage.

He returns to a warmer latitude, and reaches Mathurâ, or Muttra, on the
River Jumna; a place once famous for the relics stored in its _stûpas_.
Here, different convents followed different authorities; but once a
year they gathered together, and each sect made offering before the
relics of its chosen saint. A little later, after traversing several
small States, it would seem that he visited the source of the Ganges,
although, in spite of explicit statement, this has been doubted. He
speaks of the river as being 3/4 mile wide at its source! May he not
mean that the end of its parent glacier is of that width?[2]

A little later on, we are told of the softness of Ganges water; of
how multitudes of bathers assemble on its sandy banks to cleanse them
of sin; and how a mere rinsing of the mouth with its water wall avert
every calamity and secure future blessedness. “But there is no truth in
this universal belief, which is wholly the invention of heresy,” adds
our traveller, critical of everything but the superstitions which had
encrusted his own faith. And he is of opinion that this special form of
false belief is on the wane among the Indian people!

We find him before long in Western Rohilkand, and then again in an icy
Himalayan valley, where “for ages a woman has ruled; wherefore it is
called the Kingdom of the Eastern Women.” It corresponds to what is
now British Garwal and Kumain. As then, so is it to-day: relics of the
matriarchate and polyandry are to be found among the Himalayan ranges.

He returns to the Ganges, and, passing through several small States,
arrives at Kanauj. He is for ever visiting scholars, and sits for
months at the feet of every famous sage. He does so at Kanauj, which he
tells us is a city measuring four miles in length and one in breadth.
He is now in an Empire recently established by Sîlâditya, a warrior
of the Vaiśya, or trading, class, who had forced a number of petty
Kinglets to become his tributaries. Sîlâditya would seem to have been
a devout Buddhist, favouring the Greater Vehicle, and, really devoting
himself to the prosperity of the Empire he ruled.

He now enters Ayôdhyâ—Oude—the same name that, eleven centuries
later, rang so compellingly in the ears of Clive and Warren Hastings.
Here Brâhmanism was getting the upper hand. And there was not merely
much lawlessness but a terrible perversion of religious worship
abroad in this land, which reminds one of modern Thuggee. A boat with
Hiuen-Tsiang and eighty others on board was gliding peacefully down the
Ganges, when a whole little navy of pirates, which had lain concealed
under the dense foliage of the river-bank, shot out into mid-stream,
and surrounded the pilgrim’s vessel. Some of the passengers leaped
into the river; those who remained in the vessel were towed ashore and
robbed. Now these water-thieves were devotees of the goddess Durgâ, the
wife of Siva, and were wont to offer at her altar a yearly sacrifice
of some unblemished human victim, selected from their captives. They
carefully examined Hiuen-Tsiang, and pronounced him fit for this
purpose. Some of his companions generously offered to take his place;
but the pirates would have none of them—Hiuen-Tsiang and he alone was
the goddess’ chosen prey. He, of all the company, remained calm and
undismayed. “Let me enter Nirvâna tranquil and happy,” he said, his
mind wholly occupied with some future incarnation wherein he might turn
such cruel hearts as those of the pirates. These, amazed, and even
touched, by his meek and compassionate fortitude, granted him a few
more minutes of life. Just at this moment, a squall came on, so fierce
that it terrified the pirates, even. Hiuen-Tsiang’s companions were
loud in exclaiming that it was heaven’s warning of the awful vengeance
which would ensue on the murder of a saint. The hearts of the homicides
were stricken by fear. One of them took the pilgrim’s hand. He only
felt the pressure; for his eyes were closed and he was wrapt in some
celestial vision. He asked if the fatal moment had come; and when he
learned that the mind of the robbers was changed, he began to unfold
“the Law” to them with such persuasive power that they cast their
instruments of sacrifice into the river, restored what they had stolen,
and quietly went their way.

He visited Prayâga (Allahabad), near the confluence of the Ganges and
Jumna, and then took a dangerous course, south-west, through a forest
infested with wild elephants and beasts of prey, to Kosâmbi-nagar, now
a mere village on the Jumna, only to find ten Buddhist monasteries
ruined and deserted and fifty temples of flourishing Brâhmanism,
frequented by an enormous number of “heretics.” Thence he travelled
northwards, and came to Gautama’s birth place, Kapila. It was a waste.
Almost everywhere Brâhmanism was quietly triumphing and Buddhism in
gentle decay; although it was not until the following century that this
shrivelling process became rapid, and four or five centuries had yet to
pass before new dynasties sacked monasteries and burned their inmates
or expelled them from India in such wise that Buddhism became extinct
throughout the Great Peninsula.

At Bânâras (Benares) he saw Brâhman ascetics who shaved the head, or
went about naked, or covered themselves with ashes, and “by all manner
of austerity sought to escape from any more births and deaths.” He
tells us of the blueness of the sacred river and its rolling waves; of
the sweet taste of its waters and the fineness of its sands; of how
numbers of people, in order to wash away the pollution of sin, “would
abstain from eating for seven days, and then drown themselves in the
sacred stream. Daily, towards sunset, ascetics would climb up a pillar
set in the middle of the river, cling to it by one hand and one foot in
a marvellous manner, and gaze at the sun until he went down, when they
would descend. Thereby they hoped to escape from reincarnation.” “If
the body of a dead man be cast into the stream, he cannot fall into an
evil way. Swept on by its waters and forgotten by men, he is safe on
the other side.”

It was at Bânâras that Gautama began his evangel, and the vast district
between Jumna and the mountains of Nepal was the main scene of his
labours. In the Kingdom of Magadha, which, like Kanduj, was under the
rule of Sîlâditya, he found an area of fourteen miles covered with the
ruins of a city which was flourishing when Fa-Hien visited India. The
stones of _stûpas_, monasteries, pagodas and hospitals for men and
beasts cumbered the ground.

While Hiuen-Tsiang was staying at the place where Gautama “Sâkyamûni”
as he was called during the ascetic portion of his career—that is to
say, “the sage of the family of the Sâkyas”—became “Buddha,” or “the
Enlightener of men,” a deputation of four of the most distinguished
monks of the great Sarighârâma of Nâlanda—the greatest scholastic and
monastic institution in the world—came to him bearing an invitation
to stay there. When he arrived he was welcomed with much state and
ceremony. Two hundred monks and crowds of people greeted him, singing
songs in his praise, bearing standards and umbrellas, and scattering
flowers and scent. They raised him to a seat of honour, and then the
sub-director sounded a gong and repeated the invitation. Twenty grave
and reverend seniors of the monastery presented him to the Father
Superior, who was no other than the famous scholar Sîlabhadra, a
dignitary so exalted that no one dared name him except by his title
of “Treasury of the Righteous Law.” Hiuen-Tsiang had to drag himself
towards this sage on knees and elbows, clacking his heels together,
and striking the ground with his brow. This done, seats were brought
forward, compliments were interchanged, and the pilgrim was made free
of the institution. The best rooms were given up to him; ten servants
were allotted to him, and, daily he was furnished with an ample supply
of food at the cost of the monks and the Râja. A Buddhist monk and a
Brâhman, dwelling in peace together, took him abroad from time to time
and shewed him the holy sights of the neighbourhood, seated in state on
an elephant or carried in a palanquin; but when he was in the convent
the “Treasury of the Righteous Law” devoted no small measure of his
time to his instruction in the higher learning.

In the Seventh Century there was not, in the whole world a seat of
learning which might compare with the splendid establishment at
Nâlanda. It had been magnificently endowed by a succession of monarchs
and still enjoyed the royal favour as much as ever. There were open
courts and secluded gardens; splendid trees, casting a grateful shade,
under which the monks and novices might meditate; cool fountains of
fresh water that gurgled delightfully in the hot season. Ten thousand
inmates dwelt in six blocks of buildings four stories high, which
looked out on large courts. There were a hundred rooms set apart for
lectures on religion and on all the science and literature of the time.
There were halls wherein disputations frequently took place; and in
these Hiuen-Tsiang took a distinguished part. The monks impressed him
favourably: he found them sincere, and living in the strict observance
of severe rules. He says: “from morning to night, young and old help
each other in discussions, for which they find the day too short.” The
mental power and learning of the monks were as renowned as the towers,
the pavilions, and the cool retreats of the convent-university in which
they dwelt. The study of medicine and natural history and useful and
useless branches of mundane research was by no means cast aside for
speculation. But the latter was of so subtle a character that, while
ten hundred might be found capable of expounding twenty books of the
Sâtras and Sâstras, only five hundred could deal with thirty books, and
only ten with fifty; although students were not admitted until they had
proved themselves men of parts, and well-read in books, old and new,
by hard public discussion; and of ten candidates for admission, seven
or eight were rejected. Altogether, Hiuen-Tsiang spent five years in
study here; and he became one of the ten who could expound fifty sacred
books. But Sîlabhadra, the Father Superior, who was his tutor, had left
no sacred book unstudied.

From Nâlanda, our pilgrim proceeded to Patna, and crossing the Ganges,
visited Gayâ. He saw everything worth seeing in the country about
Bhagalpur, and found there a monastery of the first order, the origin
of which was a curious history. A “heretic” from South India had
marched into the country, staff in hand, with stately step and pompous
mien, beating “the drum of discussion.” On his head, he bore a lighted
torch, and his belly was encased in plates of shining copper. When
asked the reason for such strange attire, he replied that the torch
was to enlighten the ignorant multitude, who dwelt in darkness, and
the belt was for self-preservation, since he was so filled with wisdom
that he feared his belly would burst. In spite of this mummery, he
proved himself so well instructed and persuasive that all the learned
men in the Kingdom were unable to controvert his arguments. At last, a
Buddhist from Southern India was sent for and reduced him to silence.
The Râja was so impressed by the victory that he founded the monastery.

Our traveller now came to the land of the sugar-cane. His account of
the Kingdoms he visited after leaving the chief scenes of Gautama’s
missionary zeal, and the history of his wanderings, put together from
his notes and conversations with his pupils, become less full than
before; but it is clear that he made his way to “the shore-country” of
the Bay of Bengal, which would seem to be the Sunderbans, between the
rivers Ganges and Hûgli—afterwards a name of horror, as the lair of
infamous Portuguese pirates. At all events, he crossed the great Delta
of the Ganges, intending to embark for Ceylon at Tamluk on the Selai,
just where that river joins the Hûgli. Fa-Hian had done so, and had
seen Ceylon and its monuments; but Hiuen-Tsiang was given such accounts
of the perils of the long voyage that anxiety for the safety of the
treasures he had collected induced him to travel by land to South
India, and he determined to sail thence across the narrow Palk Strait.
So he returned inland, nearly as far back as Bhagalpur again, and
proceeded thence to Orissa. Thence he travelled south-westward to the
district watered by the upper tributaries of the Mahanadi and Godavari
in Central India; penetrating many a pestiferous marsh and perilous
jungle, deep and dangerous forest and scorching desert-plain, before
he arrived at Congeveram, the Dravidian capital, a little south-west of
Madras and north-west of Pondicherri. Here he learned that Ceylon had
become the theatre of a bloody war and that it would be impossible to
reach it. So he turned his reluctant steps to the north.

He tells of the courage, honesty and love of truth of the Dravidian
race, and of the heat and fruitfulness of the land they inhabited. He
speaks of his return-journey as being partly through “a wild forest
and many deserted villages where bands of brigands attack travellers.”
Then, going north-west, he came to the country of the Mahrattas—not
the modern race which goes by that name, but a people who apparently
were Rajpoots, the old military Aryan aristocracy of India, whose
widows, following a Scythian custom, cast themselves on the funeral
pyre of their husbands to be worthy of their chivalry and to rejoin
them in the next life. Hiuen-Tsiang describes the Mahrattas as being
tall of stature, honest and simple; grateful to friends, relentless to
enemies. They avenged an insult at the risk of life; they would forget
all about themselves in their haste to give aid. They always gave
due warning to a foe before attacking him, and spared the enemy who
should yield. A commander who lost a battle was not directly punished;
but he received a present of women’s clothes, and this was enough:
it drove him to suicide. The army was of several hundred chosen men,
who went into battle drunk, and made their elephants drunk also. Then
they would rush forward in close array, bearing everything before them
and trampling on the foe. Nothing could withstand such an onset. And
one man all alone, with his lance in hand, was always quite ready to
challenge and fight ten thousand. These champions had drums beaten
before them every time they went abroad; and should one of them come
across a man and slay him no notice of the offence was taken.

Passing through Western India and States which bordered on the Arabian
Sea, we find our traveller in Southern Malwa and Rajputana and, later,
in Sind. Twice in his account of Southern and Western India and once
in the _Life and Journeyings of Hiuen-Tsiang_, we are told that he
heard of a “Land of Western Women.” While on the Coromandel Coast,
he heard of an island inhabited by women who bore female children
only to Persian demons. Of old time, they were wont to allure sailors
and traders by signals. If successful, they changed themselves into
beautiful women, holding flowers and dispersing sweet scents. They
went forth to meet voyagers to the sound of sweet music, and, having
inveigled them into their City, which was built of iron, and having
solaced them with their society, they would cast them into an iron
prison and devour them at leisure. On the Western Coast, he is told
that the island is rich in gems and lies to the south-west of the
Byzantine Empire, to which it is tributary, and where its precious
stones are exchanged. It is inhabited by women only. Once a year, the
Emperor of Byzantium sends them male partners; and, if boys are born
of the union, the laws forbid their being brought up on the island.
Marco Polo also speaks of a Kingdom of Western Women. Ferdusi, the
Persian Poet, makes Alexander the Great visit an island-city of women
where no man was allowed to dwell. In the early art and literature of
Buddhism the legend is to be found. It reached Malaya. It made its
way into Chinese literature, too, some generations before the time of
Hiuen-Tsiang. But the locality given to the island varies with the
legend.

Here, surely, are our Homeric friends, the Sirens—the daughters of
Achelous, serpent and ox, and the Muse Calliope—whose “shrill music
reached Ulysses on the middle sea” from a little island off Sicily. Can
these Western and Eastern legends have come from a common source; or,
did they travel overland with trader or missionary; or was some faint
echo of the golden harp of Hellas wafted by the breezes which bore the
trader across the Arabian Sea to Sind and Southern India? Possibly
the latter; for our author speaks of the island as lying to the west,
beyond the great sea which laves the shores of Kutch. It is perplexing
to find what would seem to be the same story told by the natives of
Martinique to Columbus during his second voyage.

From Sind beyond the Indus, Hiuen-Tsiang proceeded to Multân in the
Punjâb, and saw the majestic temple of the Sun-dêva, whose image was
cast in gold and set with rare gems. Crowds of worshippers flocked
hither from other Kingdoms; and women did honour to the god with music
and torches and offerings of blossoms and perfumes. The temple was
surrounded with water-tanks and flowery groves; and near it was a
“House of Happiness,” which was a hospital for the poor and sick.

He visited this temple on his way back to the sacred land where Gautama
had assumed his mission of teacher of mankind; for he felt that he must
return thither. So he made a thousand miles eastward and arrived at
Magadha in time to see the grand procession of the ashes of Buddha. He
thought the remains too large to be genuine; so did an Indian sage of
great reputation, and it would seem that the crowd of spectators were
also in doubt. Some time afterwards, suddenly, the relics could not be
found; the _stûpa_ in which they were kept was a sheet of light, and
flames, in five different colours shot up to the sky. This brilliant
phenomenon was witnessed by a wondering multitude; it gradually passed
away; and so did incredulity.

Hiuen-Tsiang passed his time in the monasteries of Magadha, partly in
study, partly in refuting Brâhmans and the followers of the Little
Vehicle. To refute the latter could not have been a difficult task:
simple monks, only instructed in practical ethics, would stand no
chance against an erudite monk trained in subtle speculation and
fine distinctions. As in European Universities of the Middle Ages,
the thesis to be disputed was hung up by its supporter; and whatever
wrangler chose to deny it would take it down. Then a contest ensued;
and, at Nâlanda, its learned Head, the “Treasury of the Law,” was wont
to preside at great discussions. In some of these, our Chinaman took a
triumphant part.

On one occasion, a certain Brâhman had hung up a challenge to the
Buddhists, which consisted of 40 articles, and, according to custom,
he wagered his head to maintain them; possibly perfectly well aware
that, in the unexpected event of defeat, the forfeit would not be
exacted. For some days, no one would come forward to oppose him. Then
Hiuen-Tsiang sent a monk to take up the insolent challenge in his
name: it was torn into shreds, and trampled under foot. At the solemn
discussion which ensued, he held forth at portentous length, and
dumbfounded the Brâhman. Hiuen-Tsiang then told him he had suffered
humiliation enough: he was free to go.

The defeated wrangler went to Kâmarûpa, a Kingdom which extended
from west of the Brahmaputra to Manipur, on the borders of Burmah.
The eloquence and learning of our Chinaman would appear to have
converted the Brâhman, who was generous enough to tell the Râja of his
defeat. The tale so impressed that monarch that he sent an invitation
to Hiuen-Tsiang to pay him a visit; but our pilgrim, having fully
accomplished the purpose for which he had travelled so far, was eager
to return to China. The Râja waxed wroth at his disobedience to a
royal command, and warned the “Treasury of the Law” that, little as
he cared for the religion of Buddha, he would come with a vast army
and level with the dust the famous building over which he presided if
Hiuen-Tsiang were not forwarded without delay. It was evident that the
Râja, a powerful ally or tributary of Sîlâditya, whose loyalty to that
great monarch was not too assured, might conceivably let loose the
hounds of uncertain war. Here, a gleam of enlightenment is thrown on
the attitude of Râjas tributary to Sîlâditya, who had won his empire
by the sword and who had made Kanouj and Allahabad his capital cities.
Hiuen-Tsiang was despatched by Sîlabhadra to far-off Kâmarûpa; He had
been at the Râja’s court a whole month, when Sîlâditya returned from
the chastisement of a rebellious feudatory and learned whither he had
gone. Sîlâditya had urged the pilgrim to visit him in vain; now he
finds him at the court of a rival. Here is the making of a very pretty
quarrel. Sîlâditya sends to the Râja, saying that he wants the Chinese.
“My head first!” replies that monarch. Then Sîlâditya waxed wrath; and
his wrath is terrible. “Since I have power to cut off your head, it may
be given straightway to my ambassador,” is the message he returns. The
Râja of Kâmarûpa now begins to reflect. He orders his court-barge and
sets off with Hiuen-Tsiang in it to make amends to Sîlâditya.

But he took the precaution to be accompanied by a great army. The
Ganges was crowded with boats filled with troops, and, as these were
rowed up the stream, other soldiery mounted on war-elephants marched
slowly along the banks. On their arrival at the court of Sîlâditya
he commanded that Hiuen-Tsiang should be presented to him. The Râja
of Kâmarûpa saw at once that here was an opportunity of quietly
humiliating Sîlâditya in his turn—a monarch who, from conviction or
by policy, professed the deepest reverence for the Greater Vehicle
and was the munificent patron of Buddhist institutions. He suggested
to Sîlâditya that it would be unworthy of a monarch so renowned
for cherishing sages and saints to do otherwise than pay the holy
and learned Chinese pilgrim the compliment of visiting him first.
Sîlâditya fell in with the proposal; and the Râja at once went back to
Hiuen-Tsiang and persuaded him, “for the honour of the law of Buddha,”
to consent. Thus, should his enemy, or anyone, never be sensible of
so subtle a revenge, the secret of it was sweet in the heart of the
Eastern King; a psychological peculiarity by no means confined to the
ruler of Kâmarûpa.

Next evening, shortly after sunset, the Ganges was ablaze with torches;
the air resounded with the noise of tom-toms, for Sîlâditya was about
to pay his visit with Generals and Ministers of State. It was the
distinction of the Lord-paramount that the beating of a hundred gongs
heralded his approach and gave step to his guards. The haughty despot,
who determined the fate of thousands by a gesture, cast himself on
the ground at the feet of the humble monk, and kissed them. Next day,
the Master of the Law returned the visit. Now, a sister of the great
monarch, an enthusiast for high doctrine, who was seated behind the
throne, entreated that a great assembly of all the sages of the Empire
should be convoked at Kanouj to give Hiuen-Tsiang an opportunity of
setting out the beauty of the Greater Vehicle. So, at the beginning of
the cold season, the sages assembled at Kanouj, mounted on elephants
or carried in palanquins, surrounded by banners and accompanied by an
immense multitude. An elephant bore a golden statue of Buddha on his
back, and this was solemnly erected on a daïs. To the right of the
elephant, marched Sîlâditya, dressed as Indra and carrying a white
fly-flap in his hand; to the left was Kumâra, monarch of Kâmarûpa,
in the garb of Brâhm, and carrying a parasol of precious silk. Both
monarchs wore magnificent tiaras, from which garlands of flowers and
ribbons set with jewels hung down. Following the golden image and the
two Râjas came our Master of the Law, seated on a big elephant, and
then the officials and monks of the two Kingdoms, also on elephants.
Eighteen tributary princes were drawn up on either side, also riding
elephants, and these fell into the procession as the great Râjas and
Hiuen-Tsiang passed on.

Food was provided for everybody, without distinction of rank, and
rich gifts were bestowed on all the monks. Hiuen-Tsiang ordered his
thesis to be hung up; but eighteen days passed, and no one attempted
to controvert it. But the followers of the Little Vehicle were so
mortified that some of them conspired against Hiuen-Tsiang’s life. The
plot was detected, and a severe edict was issued that even the very
smallest slander against him would be punished by loss of tongue; while
any attempt to injure him bodily would be followed by decapitation. At
the end of the eighteen days, following ancient usage, the victorious
pilgrim was mounted on a richly-caparisoned elephant and taken a tour
round the crowd, in the company of the dignitaries of the Empire and
with full state-honours. Rich presents were offered him; but these he
refused; and then Sîlâditya dissolved the assembly; and the eighteen
kings, the monks, and the crowd returned every man to his own abode.

Now, it was the custom of Sîlâditya, as it had been that of his
predecessors, to distribute all their accumulated wealth at the end of
every five years. But they were careful to keep their war-elephants,
war-horses and weapons of war; for on these their power rested. The
practice kept the people submissive and contented, while effective
force remained with the Râja. The distribution was made on a plain at
the confluence of Ganges and Jumna, three miles from Prayâga, and not
far from the existing city of Allahabad. When the time for it arrived,
Sîlâditya took the Master of the Law with him. He observed that gold
and silver, silk and cotton, and much else were stored up in temporary
buildings within an enclosure, and arrangements were made for seating
a thousand persons at a time. The eighteen tributary Kings and a vast
crowd of monks and laity were summoned to be present, and did not fail
to arrive. It is significant that each tributary prince brought his
army with him: it throws light on the character of Sîlâditya’s empire.

On the first day, the statue of Buddha was installed in a temple and
adorned with jewels. A great feast followed on this ceremony; it was
accompanied by music and the scattering of blossoms; and then rich
gifts were distributed among the more important of the guests. On the
second day, the image of the Sun-god was honoured, and presents of
magnificence were made. The third day, the god Siva received honours,
and a similar distribution was made. The fourth day, every one of about
10,000 monks was given a hundred pieces of gold and a cotton garment.
The fifth day, distribution to the Brâhmans was begun; but it is worthy
of note that the awards to them took up three weeks all but a day. On
the sixth day, and for 9 days following, alms were given to “heretics”;
on the eighth, and for the next nine days, to naked mendicants from
distant Kingdoms. Lastly, it took a whole month to give to the poor, to
orphans, and to poor men who had no family to fall back upon. Finally
Sîlâditya took off and gave up his tiara and necklace, exclaiming that
he had exchanged them for incorruptible riches. And now, the tributary
Râjas surrendered their robes and jewels to their Lord-paramount. What
with this ordinance and the retention of the sinews of war, Sîlâditya
remained no less powerful than before.

Our pilgrim now obtains permission to set forth on his return-journey.
He is offered an escort to China should he choose to return by sea;
but he has precious manuscripts to preserve, the rich harvest of his
labours, and he prefers to take the smaller risk of desert and icy
mountains to that of pirates and of frail, clumsy craft, breasting “the
feasted waters of the sea stretched out In lazy gluttony, expecting
prey.” Moreover, whether T’ai Tsung, now Emperor of China, would
welcome a foreign Embassy, may have been in his mind. He refused all
gifts from the Râja of Kâmarûpa, save a warm garment needful for the
high passes.

Now, the Master of the Law had been wont, if he had no escort to
protect him, to send an attendant monk ahead, and, should his
fore-runner meet with wayside thieves, he would announce the character
of Hiuen-Tsiang’s mission. The explanation had been made more than
once, and prevailed. But many a Râja was now eager to give him a warm
welcome and send soldiery to see him safe in the next Kingdom. And,
Sîlâditya, not merely went with him some small part of the long way,
but charged a tributary prince of the North to accompany and protect
him through the Punjâb. He also presented the pilgrim with a big
elephant, horses and chariots to convey the manuscripts and images he
had collected, and 3000 pieces of gold and 10,000 pieces of silver to
defray the expenses of the journey. He also provided him with letters
to various princes whose territories he would have to cross, ordering
or recommending them to expedite his journey. These documents were
written on rolls of cotton and sealed with red wax. Sîlâditya and his
tributary Râjas even rode out again to catch the pilgrim up and bid him
a second farewell.

Easy progress was made across North-West India; and native rulers vied
with each other in doing honour to the traveller from afar. Now, at the
best of times, to cross the Indus is perilous; and this time it was not
effected without mishap. The “Master of the Law” rode on the elephant;
but the manuscripts, images, relics, and a precious collection of
seeds, which he had made during his travels, and which he hoped might
grow in China, were placed in a boat under the care of a special
custodian. When the middle of the current was reached, a storm-gust
swept over the river, and the boat was well nigh sunk by tossing waves.
The custodian was rescued with great difficulty; but half a hundred
manuscripts and the valuable collection of seeds which might have done
so much service, were lost. Only by the very greatest exertion was
anything at all saved.




CHAPTER V.

INDIAN SOCIAL LIFE IN THE SEVENTH CENTURY.


Once more we find Hiuen-Tsiang by the Kâbul river. Many years had
passed since he rested on its banks and entered India. Since that
time he had made himself a finished Sanskrit scholar; he had visited
three and a half score of States; he had traversed the whole breadth
and well-nigh the whole length of the great Peninsula; he had debated
the subtlest questions with the profoundest scholars and acutest
minds in India; he had been entertained by powerful princes as their
venerated guest. In every corner of a vast territory, he had met with
large hospitality at the hands of men of differing creeds; he had seen
many new things, strange and wonderful; more than once, his life had
been in jeopardy, and narrow indeed had been his escape; he had visited
every spot connected with the life of Gautama, from the scene where
Bôdhisattva “descended spiritually into the womb of his mother” to the
place where he became Buddha, and to the place of his death. He had
visited every spot sacred to Asôka-râja, the great promulgator of the
faith. It had been granted him to see the shadow of Buddha. And, above
all, he had not failed in his quest. Written on prepared palm-leaves
and carefully packed, were the so much lacking sacred scriptures; much
of them tales of the absurdest fantasy and most extravagant romance, it
is true; but the sympathetic eye can still discover in the fable the
mild and sweet moral teaching of the Buddhist faith.

In the _Si-yu-ki_ (Observations on Western Lands) there is a very full
account of India in the early Seventh Century. So long a residence in
that land, and such a wide knowledge of its various peoples as the
Master of the Law had acquired in personal intercourse with them makes
this invaluable. The work is preceded by a general description of the
Great Peninsula, which applies more particularly to that land, so
sacred to a Buddhist, which lies between the Jumna and the lower slopes
of the Himalayas. And, now that Hiuen-Tsiang is leaving India, it will
be well to know what he has to tell us concerning that vast region.

He begins by discussing the various names given to In-tu (India); for
each district is differently called. He gives its shape, extent and
climate. “The north is a continuation of mountains and hills, the
ground being dry and salt. On the east, there are valleys and plains,
which, being well-watered and cultivated, are fruitful and productive.
The southern district is wooded and herbaceous; the western parts are
stony and barren.”[3]

Indian measures of length and the Indian Calendar and seasons are next
described, and the author then goes on to treat of towns and buildings,
seats and clothing, dress and habits, ablutions, language and
literature, schools, castes, marriages, kings, troops, weapons, manners
and customs, administration of laws, ceremonial observances, revenues,
natural products, and commercial dealings—all in systematized order.
The lapse of thirteen centuries; conquest by Mohammedan and European
invaders; and Mohammedan and Brahmanistic oppression would appear to
have altered but little the ways and external appearance of Indian life
since Hiuen-Tsiang’s time. He tells us that “the walls of towns are
wide and high; the streets and lanes, tortuous; the roads, winding; the
thoroughfares, dirty; the stalls, arranged on both sides of the road
and furnished with appropriate signs. Butchers, fishermen, dancers,
executioners, scavengers and their like dwell outside the city. Coming
and going these people must keep to the left side of the road.” The
city-walls are of brick, but their towers are made of wood or bamboo;
the houses are plastered with cob, “mixed with cow-dung for purity”;
they are provided with wooden balconies, coated with mortar and shaded
by tiles. The roofs are of rushes, branches, tiles, or boards. It
is a habit to scatter flowers before the house. The _sarighârâmas_,
or monasteries, are very cleverly built in quadrangles, ornamented
with dome-shaped buildings of two or three stories at the corners of
each quadrangle, and joists and beams are adorned with carving; there
is much decoration and mural painting; the cells being plain on the
outside only.

Everybody takes his rest on a mat of one uniform size, but of various
degrees of ornamentation; but the Râja has an imposing throne, studded
with gems, and nobles use painted and enriched seats. The garb is of
pure white silk or cotton or hemp or goat’s hair, uncut to fit the
body and wound round the waist, gathered up under the armpits, and
then slung across the body to the right. There is quaint humour in our
pilgrim’s observation that “some of the men shave their moustaches and
have other odd customs”: one thinks of the strange appearance of some
of our long-shore men.

Women keep their shoulders covered, and their robes reach the ground.
Their hair is knotted up on the crown; otherwise it hangs loose. They
wear crowns and caps and flower-wreaths on the head, and necklaces of
jewels.

In North India, where the climate is colder, close-fitting garments are
worn. Some non-believers wear peacock-feathers, or necklaces made of
the bones of the skull; some cover their nakedness with leaf or bark,
or go bare. Some pull out the hair; others wear their whiskers bushy
and braid their hair.

The monks wear three different kinds of dress, either red or yellow in
colour. Merchants, for the most part, go bare-footed, stain the teeth
red or black, bind up the hair, and pierce the nose for the wearing of
ornaments there. Everybody is very cleanly, washing before eating,
never eating of a dish served twice over, never passing the dish on.
Wooden and stone vessels are destroyed after use; metal ones are
polished. The teeth are cleansed with a willow-stick after eating; the
hands and mouth are washed; and folk do not touch one another until
these duties are carried out. The body is washed after attending to
the calls of nature, and then perfumes are used. The bath is taken
before religious functions, and also at the time when the King washes
himself. Each province keeps its own record of events. Education is
begun early. Young Buddhists are put to the study of the five Vidyâs,
or treatises on grammar, progressively; first come the principles of
mechanics; then elements of medicine and drugs and the use of charms;
then the principles of right-doing and the distinction between the
true and the false; and, finally, the various “vehicles” of the faith.
Brâhmans are trained on similar lines by skilled teachers. Some “rise
above mundane rewards, and are as insensible to renown as to contempt
of the world.... Rulers value men of reputation highly; but are unable
to draw them to court.” But the thirst of others for honour leads them
on in the search for wisdom, and, if they finish their education at
thirty, they seek for occupation. Some Brâhmans are devoid of virtuous
principles, and waste their substance in riotous excess. Unhappily
the Buddhist schools are not without reproach: “they are constantly
at variance, and their contentious utterances swell like the waves of
an angry sea”; yet, “in various directions, they do aim at one end.”
Knowledge of sacred books and successful exegesis are rewarded by
successive grades of distinction, beginning with exemption from control
and leading up to the possession of “an elephant-carriage,” and even to
a “surrounding escort.” A successful disputant, like Hiuen-Tsiang, is
mounted on an elephant (as he was), the animal is completely covered
over with precious ornaments, and the rider is conducted by a numerous
suite to the gates of the convent. But woe betide the unhappy wretch
who proves himself a fool at these mental wrestling bouts; “his face
is painted red and white; he is bedaubed with dust and dirt, and then
borne off to some deserted spot, or cast into a ditch!” For slight
faults a monk is only reprimanded; for graver offences, silence is
enforced; for a great fault, he is cast out of the convent to find a
home for himself and take up some kind of work, or he may wander about
the roads.

We are told next about the four great castes, The Brâhman, or
hereditary priest takes precedence of the Kshattriya or military
descendents of the Aryan conquerors, a caste which rules, and observes
human kindliness. Next come the traders (Vaiśyas); fourth is the Sûdra,
the caste of tillers of the soil. When one marries, he takes social
position according as he preserves or impairs purity of caste. Widows
may not marry again.

“The succession of Râjas is confined to the Kshattriya caste, who have
from time to time achieved power by means of usurpation and bloodshed.”
The army of the Râja is one of the many separate hereditary castes of
India. In times of peace, it is garrisoned around the Râja’s palace.
In each Indian army are elephants, protected by strong armour, and the
tusks capped with sharp metal. A general issues his command from a car,
driven by two attendants, between whom he sits, and is drawn by four
horses abreast. The generals of the foot soldiers also ride in cars and
are protected by a guard. An attack is met by the cavalry, who also
carry orders. The infantry is very brave. It is armed with spear and
shield, bows and arrows, swords, axes, slings and many other weapons of
ancient usage.

Hiuen-Tsiang speaks of the common people in the highest terms. As
Wheeler remarks they “would almost appear to have been a different race
from the modern Hindus. They had not yet been moulded into existing
forms by ages of Brahmanical repression and Musselman tyranny; and they
bore a stronger resemblance to the unsophisticated Buddhists of modern
Burma than to the worshippers of Vishnu and Siva.”[4] Our traveller
admits that they are volatile, but “gentle and sweet, straight-forward,
honourable, keeping their word, with no fraud, treachery or deceit
about them.” Criminals are rare, and these few are not even beaten,
and are never put to death, but cast into prison and left to live or
die, “not being counted among men.” A small payment is exacted for a
small offence; but those who seriously offend the moral sense of the
community are mutilated in various ways, or expelled from it. Frank
confession is followed by punishment proportioned to the offence; but
denial, or attempt to wriggle out, is met by trial by ordeal. Of this
there are four kinds:—1, The accused person is put into one sack and a
stone into another; both sacks are tied together and thrown into deep
water: If the man sinks lowest, he is deemed guilty. 2, The accused has
to stand or sit on red hot iron, or to handle it, or have it applied to
his tongue: If no scars result, he is deemed innocent. 3, He is weighed
against a stone: If he weighs it down, he is innocent. 4, An incision
is made in the right thigh of a ram, and all manner of poisons and some
food of the accused are put into the wound. Should the ram survive, the
man is innocent. “The way of crime is blocked by these four methods.”
It is obvious to us that the issue of every one of these ordeals could
be manipulated in the interests of justice, or against them.

We are next told of etiquette, and are informed that no less than nine
ways of being polite are employed. Of these, the most respectful is to
cast one’s self on the ground, and then to kneel “and laud the virtues
of the one you address.” When one of inferior rank receives orders, he
lifts the skirt of his superior, and casts himself on the ground. The
“honourable person thus reverenced must speak gently to the inferior,
and touch his head, or pat him on the back, and give him kindly orders
or good advice, in order to show affection.”

When ill, there is no rush to the physic-bottle. “Everyone who falls
sick, fasts for seven days. Should he not get well in the course of
this period, he takes medicine.” Hiuen-Tsiang causes us no surprise
when he informs us that “doctors differ in their modes of treatment.”

At funerals there are weepings and lamentable cries, rending of
garments and beatings of head and breast. No one takes food in a house
where someone has died until after the funeral; and all who have been
at the death-bed are unclean until they have bathed outside the town.
Those who desire release from life “receive a farewell meal at the
hands of relatives or friends,” and then are put into a boat amid
strains of music; and this is shot into mid-Ganges, “where such persons
drown themselves.” Sometimes, but rarely, one of these may be seen on
the banks, not yet quite dead.

Hiuen-Tsiang speaks of the civil administration as being mild and
benevolent. Officials have “a portion of land assigned to them for
their personal support.” There is neither registration of families nor
forced labour. Râjas possess their own private domains, divided into
four portions; whereof one provides for state-matters and the cost of
sacrifices; one, for salaries; one, for rewarding men of exceptional
talent; and the fourth affords charity to religious bodies. By this
arrangement taxation is light, and the personal service required is
moderate, labour at public works being paid for. “Everyone keeps his
own belongings in tranquillity; and all till the ground for food.
Those who cultivate the royal estate pay a sixth part of the produce
as tribute.” There is a light tax payable on travel by river and at
barriers across the roadways.

Such people as smell of onion and garlic are thrust out of the
town. The usual food is simple, consisting of milk, cream, butter,
sugar-candy, corn cakes and mustard. Fish, mutton and venison are
eaten; other flesh is prohibited. Brâhmans and warriors drink
unfermented syrup of the grape; but the trading caste indulges in
strong drink. Rich and poor eat precisely the same food, but out of
very different vessels, both as to material and cost. They eat with the
fingers, and have no spoon, cup, or chopstick.

Hiuen-Tsiang tells us that he found India divided into 70 Kingdoms.
Nine centuries before his time Megasthenes the Greek Ambassador,
found twice as many. In spite of the many political settlements which
have had their day and vanished, some of the territories described by
Hiuen-Tsiang are divisions corresponding to natural features, race,
language, and religious customs, and remain distinct districts, each
of them with its idiosyncrasies to-day. Consolidation by successive
conquests has taken place, it is true, but the village persists.
The village-settlements were there before the Aryan conquest; they
have survived the long passage of time; they carry on their ancient
tradition, and have maintained provincial characteristics against the
pressure of the Mohammedan, the Mahrattan, and all other attempts at
organic Empire.




CHAPTER VI.

THE JOURNEY HOME BY A NEW AND PERILOUS ROUTE.


We left our hero on the Kâbul river, beyond the boundaries of India:
a royal reception awaited him at Kapiśa, and a hundred experienced
men were chosen to conduct and protect him in the passage across the
Hindû Kûsh. The shortest, but most difficult of the passes—probably
the Khawak, which reaches 13,000 feet, was selected. Seven days of
travel brought the party to those snow-mountains of which Hiuen-Tsiang
always speaks with mingled wonder, fear and dislike. Born and brought
up in a mild climate, and having now spent many years in a hot one, he
describes the discomforts and dangers of every high pass at length.
He tells us how wild and perilous are the precipices; how fearsome,
contorted, and difficult the path. Of the Hindû Kûsh he writes: “Now
the traveller is in a profound valley; now aloft on a high peak, with
its burthen of ice in full summertide. One gets along by cutting steps
in the ice, and, in three days one reaches the summit of the pass.
There, a furious icy blast, cold beyond measure, sweeps on; the valleys
are laden with accumulated snow. The traveller pushes on; for he dares
not pause. Soaring birds must needs alight; it is impossible for them
to fly; and they have to cross afoot. One gazes down on mountains that
look like hillocks.” The whole cavalcade had to dismount and clamber
up with the aid of mountain-staves. One wonders how the guides got
the elephant over such ridges; but they did. “Great men lived before
Agamemnon”; Hannibal solved the same problem two hundred years before
Christ.

At the end of the second week a large village of a hundred families
was reached, the inhabitants of which lived by rearing a very big
variety of sheep, which is said still to be found in this district.
Here the “Master of the Law” secured the services of a local guide, and
took a whole day’s rest. His escort now returned; and he set forth in
the middle of the night, mounted on a camel accustomed to the hills,
and attended by seven priests, twenty servants, the elephant which
Sîlâditya had given him, six asses, and four horses. Next morning the
bottom of the pass was reached; but there still lay before them what,
in the distance, looked like a snow-peak. But when they had ascended
a long zig-zag path and come up to it, it turned out to be mere white
rock. None the less, it towered far above the clouds, and the icy wind
there blew so hard and cutting that headway could hardly be made.

The descent of the range occupied five or six days. The route now
lay north westward to the Upper Oxus. Hiuen-Tsiang rested a month in
the camp of a petty Khân,—and then joined a caravan of traders who
were eastward bound. The caravan took a meandering course through
several little Khânates; and in one of them the Master of the Law
was struck by the singular head-gear of the women. They wore caps
three feet high, topped by two peaks of unequal length, if both
father-in-law and mother-in-law were living. The higher and lower
respectively represented these relatives. But, when one of them died,
the corresponding peak was removed; should both of them be dead, no
peaks were worn. This region was mountainous, and its inhabitants were
remarkable for their surpassing ugliness. They differed from all other
peoples in the peculiar blue-green of the iris. They were innocent of
all manners, and knew no law of justice; the horse was their study and
care, and they reared a breed of sturdy little ponies.

The caravan now followed the narrowing stream of Oxus, and, after a
time, ascended to the great plateau of the Pamirs, no less lofty than
the topmost Pyrenees. “There even in summer” says the Pilgrim “one
suffers from squalls and eddies of snowstorm. Just a few wretched
plants manage to root in ground that is almost always frozen. No
grain will sprout and no trace of man is to be found in all this vast
solitude.” But he came across a species of ostrich, a bird “ten feet
high,” of which he had previously been shown the eggs which were “as
big as small pitchers.”

The central valley of the Pamirs along which the caravan advanced, led
to difficult snow-passes of the Kizil Yart range, the highest peak of
which soars to 26,000 feet. Having forced a way over ice and through
snow, the long descent of the Eastern slopes was nearly at an end when
a band of brigands was observed to be on the look out for prey. The
traders fled, helter skelter, up the hill-side; and the robbers charged
furiously at their laden elephants, several of which they killed,
while others were drowned in trying to get across the torrents from
the mountains. It was probably at this time that Hiuen-Tsiang lost his
elephant. The thieves were soon fully occupied with their booty; the
traders seized the opportunity, drew together again, and proceeded,
with what goods they had been able to save, towards Kâshgar.

At Kâshgar the same custom obtained as at Kutchê: “When a child is
born the head is compressed by a wooden board.” The people are “fierce
and impetuous and most of them are deceitful and indifferent to polite
manners and learning. They paint their bodies and eyelids.” But they
show real skill in the making of hair-cloth and finely woven carpets.
More than six hundred years later, Marco Polo travelled along the
caravan route through Kâshgar and by Lob-Nor to China.

At Yârkand he was told that Arhats, (very purified and wise men),
“those who had obtained the holy fruit and were no longer bound by
worldly influences” “displaying their spiritual power, coming from afar
(that is, from India), abode here at rest.”

Arrived at Khotan, he found it a land of song and dance. Fa-Hian also
describes the inhabitants as being, in his time, “lovers of religious
music.”

It would seem that the caravan in which Hiuen-Tsiang travelled was
bound for Kau-chang, that land of the Uïghurs whose Khân-paramount had
tried to detain him “for the better instruction of his subjects.” Now
Khotan was tributary to this despot; and as the Master of the Law had
no desire to go out of his direct way home, or to be detained again,
not to speak of another hunger-strike, he wrote the Khân a politic
letter, wherein he recounted the perils he had undergone and the
successful issue of his sacred mission. Yet, an elephant which bore the
burthen of many scriptures had been drowned on the way home; but the
writings were saved. Would the Great Khân grant him a convoy?

It took six or seven months for a reply to arrive; and Hiuen-Tsiang
filled up the time in expounding sacred writings to the Khân of
Khotan and his subjects. When the answer came from Kau-chang, it was
favourable; the Khân of Khotan was permitted to furnish the Master of
the Law with transport for his treasures.

Fully a thousand miles still lay before him, and the painful desert
known to modern geographers as the Takla Makan must be crossed. The
route pursued was a very tortuous one, south of the great lake Lob-nor
(which lies between 2,000 and 3,000 feet above the sea-level), and
north of the Altyn-Tag mountains, which are the northern buttresses
of the great plateau of Thibet. He passed by ancient cities of
Eastern Khotan, once flourishing, now buried by drifting sands. Mere
mounds marked their sites.[5] Going East “we enter a great desert of
shifting sands, which are as a vast flood, driven hither and thither
by the wind. There is no track; and, without guide or indication,
travellers get bewildered and are lost. So the bones of beasts (which
have perished) are piled up to serve as beacons. Neither water nor
herb is to be found, and hot winds, which are frequent, befog the mind
and muddle the memory of man and beast, and make them ill and feeble.
Sometimes one hears plaintive notes and piteous lamentations, and men
get confused and know not whither they are going. Hence, many a life is
lost. And all is the work of demons and evil spirits.” All travellers
in deserts speak of the weird noises, which we now know to be due to
the shifting of the sand-ridges.[6]

And now, after sixteen years of pilgrim travel, after visiting a
hundred and ten different States, and journeying some twenty thousand
miles, Hiuen-Tsiang is drawing near his native land. He bears with
him five hundred grains of relics, reputed to belong to the body of
Tathâgarta (Gautama Buddha); one hundred and twenty-four works of
the Great Vehicle; five hundred and twenty other volumes, borne by
twenty-two horses; and six images of Buddha, in gold or silver or
sandal-wood. In the appeal for transport sent to Kau-chang, he had
written: “Notwithstanding differences in climate and mode of life;
and notwithstanding perils beyond count which have menaced me in my
journeying, I thank Heaven that nowhere did I come to harm. Reverence,
beyond all limit, has been done to me; my body has suffered no ill; and
I have fulfilled all that I vowed to accomplish.”

But his body _had_ suffered ill. The terrible ordeal of crossing
ice-bound ranges left its mark: it weakened his robust constitution and
shortened his life.

At the Chinese frontier, waggons and men were obtained, and the escort
from Khotan returned. T’ai Tsung, the great warrior statesman, now sat
on the throne he had won for his father, and to him “The Master of the
Law” announced his return. Emperor, Mandarins, Priests, and People
made ready to receive the great pilgrim with plaudit and parade such as
Western reserve bestows only on the victor in some scene of slaughter,
or on the inheritor of some soiled circlet and blood-stained robe.

The great day arrived. It was as if all China were present, so
crushing were the crowds. The Sacred Writings were taken in state to
the “Convent of the Great Bliss.” (Later they were transferred to a
“Convent of Beneficence,” specially constructed to contain them.)
High dignitaries led the way; marvellous wind-instruments discoursed
astounding music; priests in thousands chanted hymns; banners and
brilliantly-coloured rugs floated in the wind. A procession of the
most varied character, miles long, passed through the narrow, crowded
streets, which were lined by rows of flower-scatterers and less poetic,
but even more desirable, perfume burners. To the irreverent European
mind, the record of this Eastern parade in the Seventh Century suggests
a highly variegated travelling-circus; and the brow is involuntarily
raised when we come to the royal harem and its enthusiastic ladies
welcoming the return of the monk and the arrival of yet more ascetic
doctrine. The best of us is but human, and it is evident from the
narrative that, true saint as he was, the “Master of the Law” none the
less thoroughly enjoyed the recognition of his great merits, and made
little objection to the honours he received.




CHAPTER VII.

PEACEFUL DAYS.


At intervals an order came from T’ai-Tsung and his successor to appear
within the green enclosure which surrounded the Imperial Throne. It
was by Imperial command that the world possesses Hiuen-Tsiang’s report
of the States he had visited and of eighteen other States of which he
believed himself to have gathered authentic information. The work, as
already stated, is full of the absurd, fantastic fables of corrupted
Buddhism, related at full length and with perfervid unction; but it is
also a record of observation so close, systematic, and even scientific,
and of a will so firm-set and bold, that it is surpassed in no age
by any record of travel whatsoever. But there is little of personal
narrative in it. Now, Hiuen-Tsiang had lost full command of his native
language during so many years of residence among alien peoples, and it
was found necessary to get a Chinese stylist to redact his “Account of
Western Countries” (“_Si-yu-ki_”). This was done, in the main, from
notes which the pilgrim had brought back with him.

When the “Master of the Law” had finished this big undertaking, he
returned to work that had been interrupted by it—the collating,
translating and editing of the books he had brought with him. He was
accustomed to eat a slight breakfast at dawn, and to lecture to the
monks (_Sramans_) of his convent during the next four hours on some
canonical book or religious treatise. When this task was done, he would
go on with translation, marking out a certain portion for the day’s
task; but, if he had not finished this by night-fall, he usually sat on
until it was ended. He was scrupulous in his efforts to restore corrupt
text to its pristine purity; and one would always find him fully
occupied. Yet he always made time to discuss religious matters with
the sages who visited him. “When he had penetrated some profundity,
got light on some obscure passage, or amended some corrupt reading, it
seemed as if some divine being had come to his aid.... When expounding,
he was wont to become impassioned and his voice swelled out.” He had
the great gift of a convincing manner.

One is glad that his biographers did not neglect to describe his
personal appearance and other details of a similar kind. “His face,”
they say, “had a little colour to it; it was radiant and gracious; his
bearing, grave and stately. His voice was clear and penetrating; and
one never got weary of listening to him; for his words were noble,
elegant, and congenial. Often a distinguished guest would listen to
him for half a day with rapt attention. He liked to wear a garment of
fine cotton, of a length suited to his height, which was 7 _tchi_.[7]
He walked with even steps, and as one at ease. He looked you straight
in the face; there was never a hint of side-glance. He kept strict rule
and was always the same man. Nobody could rival him for warmth and
kindness of heart and gentle pity, ardour, and inviolate observance of
the Law. He was slow in making friends, and reserved in intercourse
with those that he made. Once within the gates of his monastery,
nothing but an Imperial decree could make him budge.”

Yet, on one occasion, he paid a visit to his native village. Only one
feeble old sister was left of all his family. He went with her to the
graves of their parents; it is said to clear them of weeds which had
overgrown them; but probably also to restore the few bones he had taken
with him on his pilgrimage. His parents perished during the time of
bloody civil strife, and their remains were hastily buried in a mean
grave; so he obtained Imperial permission to carry them to a better
resting-place. Thousands of monks and laity came to honour the father
and mother of the “Master of the Law.”

When Hiuen-Tsiang was a little more than 60, the hardships of travel
and the intense application of his latter years told on him; health
rapidly failed him. “I have come to the end of my work on this sacred
book,” said he to a disciple, “and also I have come near to the end
of my life. Bury me in a simple, quiet way. Wrap my body in a mat and
bear it to some lonely, hushful valley, far from any palace (_sic_) or
convent; for so impure a carcass as mine should not be near either.”
His disciples were disturbed at his condition and wept bitterly; they
tried to persuade him that he was mistaken as to the approach of death.
“I know myself,” he replied; “How can you enter into my intuition?” The
weakness increased, “The moment of departure is at hand,” he told them.
“Already my soul gives way and seems to leave me. Sell my clothes and
belongings without delay, and turn the money into images (of Buddha),
and tell the monks to pray.” He lay stiff and still for days, taking
no food. At last, when asked if he felt sure of reaching the goal of
his desires, he answered “Yes” in a weak voice. In a few moments he
was dead; yet his face retained its rosy colour and suggested supreme
happiness. He was 65 years of age.

He had begged for a simple funeral. He was buried in pomp; and there
was an immense giving of alms at his grave-side. His wish was so far
respected, however, that his remains were ultimately carried to a
reposeful spot in a tranquil valley.

Hwui-Lih, one of Hiuen-Tsiang’s disciples, whom he had employed in
translation, had gone far in writing a biography of the Master from his
notes and conversation, when his labours were interrupted by death.
Yen-Tsong, another devoted disciple took up the uncompleted work; he
collected and put the manuscripts of Hiuen-Tsiang and Hwui-Lih in
order, corrected the blunders and imperfections of Hwui-Lih’s five
volumes, and expanded them into ten volumes; which Monsieur Julien
translated into French many years ago. M. Julien condensed the later
and less interesting part of the biography, for the complete work was
too voluminous and too full of flowery periods to be worth the labour
of full translation; and even with this abridgement, much of the work,
like the _Si-yu-ki_, remains tedious reading. There is also a much
abbreviated translation into English by Dr. Samuel Beal.

Yet, the work is an imperishable monument to a great mind. When, here
and there, one suspects a little of that chastened self-inflation from
which few, if any, saints have been exempt; and when one has made due
allowance for the natural desire of two enthusiastic disciples to
offer innumerable flowers of Chinese rhetoric at the tomb of a beloved
Master, the fact remains that his lofty mind and gentle, yet ardent,
character, secured their deep reverence and commanded their devotion.
This affords further evidence of that personal attraction, the effects
of which we have so often observed in the record of his pilgrimage.
We may justly apply to this ancient Chinaman the happy phrase of John
Lyly, the Euphuist, and say of him that his soul was “stitched to the
starres.”




II.—SÆWULF, AN ENGLISH PILGRIM TO PALESTINE A.D. 1102




CHAPTER I.

EARLY PILGRIMAGE TO PALESTINE.


Very soon after Hiuen-Tsiang set forth on his arduous enterprise,
Jerusalem witnessed a remarkable scene (A.D. 629). Heraclius, Emperor
of New Rome, had overthrown the hosts of Chosroes II, the Persian,
and now he marched on foot through streets which that monarch had so
lately ravaged and shorn of half their population. A spirit of devout
and humble thankfulness possessed Heraclius and his chastened people.
The imperial feet were naked; the imperial shoulders bore the weight of
that True Cross which the aged Helena, mother of Constantine the Great,
had so significantly discovered, and which Chosroes had carried away
from the Church of the Holy Sepulchre.

Long before the True Cross was miraculously found, pious Christians
were wont to visit the sacred scenes of their Faith; but, after that
event, Pilgrimage became fashionable. Not the devout only thronged
to the Holy Land, and crowded all its many sanctified spots. The
inhabitants of Palestine were not slow to provide for the satisfaction
of the pilgrim; whether he were of the eager faithful, burning to
behold the burial places of Patriarchs and the very spot associated
with some scene of the Gospels; or were one moved by a love of novelty
and excitement. Tradition was revived, or legend invented; a vast
number of sacred relics was hit upon and produced; hostelries became
scenes of piety, and, alas! often of dissipation.

Many, if not most, of the travellers were undoubtedly impelled by
a genuine spirit of reverence; but pilgrimages have always been
popular because, under the sanction of Religion, they afforded the
excitement of mild adventure and the physical and mental exhilaration
which accompanies change of scene. As is always the case when men
gather together from many lands and find themselves released from the
restraints of home and the specified conventions of country, many were
pliant to the allurements of pleasure. Indeed, Jerusalem was soon
turned into a theatre of the passions, a centre of wild dissipation,
and even of serious crime. Gregory of Nyssa, St. Jerome, and St.
Augustine, set themselves against the fashionable craze, and told
would-be pilgrims that they might do far better by remaining at home
and praising God in whatsoever station he had assigned to them.

When Jerusalem fell to the onrush of the Arabs (A.D. 637), the
Moslem conquerors regarded it as a sacred city; for they believed
Mohammed to have been transported thence to visit Paradise. Christian
subjects and Christian pilgrims added to Mohammedan wealth; and
they were allowed, under restrictions, to dwell in or to visit the
Holy Land. Haroun-Al-Raschid, Caliph of Bagdad, and Charlemagne,
Emperor of the West, were drawn together by the political antagonism
of Constantinople alike to the Saracen and to an upstart Empire.
They exchanged gifts; and the traveller may still see some of those
sent by Haroun-Al-Raschid, as well as much else that is curious or
beautiful, in the Treasury of the great Church which Charlemagne
built at Aix-la-Chapelle. Bernard, one of three Benedictine monks who
visited the Holy Land A.D. 870, says that Christians there enjoyed such
security that if, by some accident, a traveller should lose a beast
of burden on the road, he might leave his belongings where they lay,
proceed to the nearest city for assistance, and find them untouched on
his return.

When the great Empire of the Abassides crumbled and fell, the Fatimite
Caliphs of Cairo were usually tolerant of infidels, who increased
their wealth and power. Commercial relations with the Christian West
continued; and pilgrims flocked to the Holy Land. In the tenth century,
that darkest of the Dark Ages, John of Parma visited Palestine no fewer
than seven times; and even far-off Iceland sent its pilgrims.

But in the eleventh century (A.D. 1074) the Seljuk Turk swept down
from the Oxus, and, aided by Emirs in revolt, took Jerusalem. The main
body of the Turkish army retained the barbarous habits of a nomadic
people; they lusted for battle; they were drunk with blood. Palestine
became the scene of exaction, of debauchery, and of every kind of
licence and excess. Churches were ransacked for spoil; the rich pilgrim
was subject to threat and compelled to disgorge much of his wealth
before he was allowed to see Jerusalem; the poor pilgrim, already worn
down by privation and suffering in some diminutive crazy craft, met,
on landing, with insult and outrage. Neither Mohammedan Cairo nor
Christian Constantinople were strong enough to deal with the Turk:
he exhibited Moslem fanaticism at its worst. The Scimitar had indeed
displaced the Cross.




CHAPTER II. “DIEU LE VEULT.”


One of the eye-witnesses of the wretchedness of Christians in Palestine
was a certain Peter, a man from Picardy; high-strung; one to whom
a very varied experience brought no satisfaction. His restless
disposition had driven him into the profession of arms; he had sought
for peace in study; he had tried the companionship of a wife, who had
borne him the boon of children; his spirit found no tranquility among
cloistered monks; he fled to the greater seclusion of a hermitage.
There visions left his soul still unsatisfied, and he went to the Holy
Land. The sufferings of Christians at the hands of the Turk filled him
with spiritual fury. He returned to Europe, and with inextinguishable
zeal, traversed its western half to urge in impassioned eloquence,
which made every heart throb and frenzied every mind, the union of all
Christendom for the destruction of the Turk and the re-establishment of
the True Faith in its first home.

He set Europe ablaze. Fourteen generations of Christians had grieved
over the Moslem occupation of the Holy Land. John Zimiskes, the
ablest and most popular of Byzantine generals, had carried his arms
as far as Lebanon in the year 975, and had recovered what were said
to be the shoes of the Saviour and the hair of John the Baptist. But,
contrary to the vainglorious assertions of Byzantine historians, he
was unable to penetrate into Palestine. In 1073, Hildebrand, the great
Pope-Statesman, was anxious to deliver the Holy Places; but any project
that he may have formed came to naught; for the Head of the Holy Roman
Empire was bent on subordinating the Church to his Imperial Will; and
the Head of the Church was even more resolute in his resolve to make
the Papacy independent and supreme. About this time, German prelates
headed 7,000 pilgrims, of whom only 2,000 survived to see their home
once more. The conquest of Jerusalem remained a dream until Peter the
Hermit awoke the sleeper.

But now Urban II responded to his call, and summoned and presided over
the famous Council of Clermont in Auvergne. “God wills it,” shouted
the assembly; “a truce of God” was declared; private war and princely
quarrels appeared to be forgotten; and all Western Europe prepared for
a Crusade.

The barons were undoubtedly captive to a great idea, and their zeal
was sincere. But little of any human action is due to a single motive.
Remission of sin was promised to those who should assume the Cross;
and love of battle, the charm of novelty, and the desire of acquiring
large and lucrative fiefs in the Holy Land also played their part.
The imagination of the common people, so lively and virile, often
so spiritual and exalted in the Middle Ages, was no less fired than
that of the barons. The spirit which directed men to the cloister now
summoned them to the camp. A belief that God had decreed the expulsion
of the Turk, and would protect and direct them to the capture of the
Holy City, filled all men with fanatic fervour. The sound of clarion
and trumpet and the clash of arms mingled with the voice of the
preacher exhorting seigneur and serf. To men of the eleventh century,
the curtains of the Unseen were often withdrawn, and the splendour of
God shone forth, or devils appeared, comely to tempt, or distorted
to terrify. Guibert tells us that, while at Beauvais, he noticed, at
mid-day, a few clouds stretched a little obliquely athwart others, and
“All at once, thousands of voices from every quarter cried out that a
cross had appeared in the sky.”

But, as with the barons, motives other than religious also moved the
populace and favoured the Crusade. Private war had been unceasing;
famine and pestilence, the attendants on war, had desolated Europe;
the serf lay prostrate under the heel of his exacting seigneur. There
would be release from these evils in that land which the Redeemer of
Mankind had chosen to be the scene of his birth and Sacrifice.

The wave of enthusiasm struck our own shores, and passed beyond
them. William of Malmesbury says in his “Chronicles of the Kings of
England” that, “there was no nation so remote, no people so retired,
as not to contribute its portion.” This ardent love not only inspired
the continental provinces, but even all who had heard the name of
Christ, whether in the most distant islands, or savage countries. The
Welshman left his hunting; the Scot his fellowship with lice; the Dane
his drinking party; the Norwegian his raw fish. Lands were deserted
of their husbandmen; houses of their inhabitants; even whole cities
migrated. There was no regard to relationship; affection to their
country was held in little esteem; God alone was placed before their
eyes. Whatever was stored in granaries, or hoarded in chambers, to
answer the hopes of the avaricious husbandman, or the covetousness of
the miser, all, all was deserted; they hungered and thirsted after
Jerusalem alone. Joy attended such as proceeded; while grief oppressed
those who remained. But why do I say remained? You might see the
husband departing with his wife; indeed, with all his family; you
would smile to see the whole household laden on a carriage, about to
proceed on their journey. The road was too narrow for the passengers,
the path too confined for the travellers, so thickly were they thronged
with endless multitudes. A French eye-witness tells us that “thieves
and evil-doers of all kinds cast themselves at the feet of priests
to receive the cross.... The rustic shod his oxen like horses; the
children on approaching any large town or castle would ask: ‘is that
Jerusalem?’”

These undisciplined hordes became turbulent; their march was marked
by famine, pillage and murder. The few who reached Asia Minor were
exterminated.

Macaulay’s “schoolboy” knows the story of the disciplined army of the
First Crusade; how, after the Caliph of Cairo had wrested Jerusalem
from the weakened Turk and offered peace and security to Christians in
vain, the slow advance of the invaders, marked by incredible cruelty
on both sides, was so far successful that the crusading barons and
their followers hurled themselves against the Holy City and took
it (A.D. 1099). “Even civilization always bears a brute within its
bosom,” remarks Sainte-Beuve; and assuredly Mediæval Religion made
small attempt to caste out the devils that made the Cross their screen.
The loftiest passions are often unstable; the enthusiasm of the crowd
readily passes from mood to mood. The fervour of faith became the
frenzy of carnage. Raymond of Agiles, an eye-witness, declares that the
Mosque of Omar and its portals ran blood up to the knees and even so
far as to the reins of the horses. For seven days, Jerusalem was given
up to slaughter and pillage.

Yet, in spite of a campaign tarnished with shame and dyed with guilt,
the Christian ideal had not wholly disappeared. The growing spirit of
Chivalry was not wanting, nor was the Norman genius for statesmanship
absent. At the famous “Assizes of Jerusalem,” a code of laws was drawn
up better than the Middle Ages had yet known. But after Baldwin was
crowned at Bethlehem (A.D. 1100), the new Kingdom remained unsettled.
Neither Christian nor Saracen was likely to forget the atrocities of
war; the whole of Palestine was far from being subdued; a few parts
were still held by the Infidel; the paths to Jerusalem were still
perilous for the pilgrim; but once again the Holy City and other sacred
places were under Christian rule. The enthusiasm and joy of Western
Europe ran high. The tide of pilgrimage at once set in, and an obscure
Englishman was one of the first pilgrims to reach Jerusalem.




CHAPTER III. SÆWULF’S RECORD.


There is preserved in the library of Corpus Christi College, Cambridge,
a valuable collection of ancient manuscripts presented by an old pupil
of the College, who was no other than Matthew Parker, Archbishop of
Canterbury in the reign of Queen Elizabeth. Among these manuscripts
is a mere fragment, written in Mediæval Latin, which tells of the
pilgrimage to Jerusalem of one Sæwulf, an Englishman, who must have
started from his native shores thirty-six years after the landing of
William the Conqueror, and less than two years after the coronation of
Baldwin.[8] The record of Sæwulf is the broken voice of an obscure,
unlettered palmer, which chance has preserved from common sepulture
with things more important in the Ancient Silences. It gives us little
more than a glimpse of a single year of adventurous pilgrimage in the
life of a plain Englishman who, like the Chinaman who undertook a
sacred journey nearly five centuries before him, having beheld “a gleam
upon the mountain, needs must arise and go thither.”

The narrative begins with the statement: “I Sæwulf, an unworthy
person and an evil doer, made for Jerusalem that I might pray at the
tomb of our Lord.” Who Sæwulf was, is open to conjecture. It seems
probable that he was the man of that name of whom William, Librarian
of Malmesbury Abbey, speaks in his “Book of Bishops”; a merchant who
had recurring spasms of penitence, during which he was wont to repair
to Wulstan, Bishop of Worcester, a prelate of “pious, simple truth,”
who commanded the affection of the people and the confidence of the
King. This Sæwulf was probably a native of Worcester. Wulstan, we know,
was the last of the Saxon Bishops; for the hand of the Norman was
heavy on the prostrate land, and it was the policy of the Conqueror,
as William of Malmesbury tells us, in another of his works, to replace
the native bishops on their death “by diligent men of any nation except
English”—a policy which the Church supported; for religion had been in
a decaying state in England for some years before the arrival of the
Normans. Indeed, “the clergy, contented with a very slight degree of
learning, could scarcely stammer out the words of the sacraments; and a
person who understood grammar was an object of wonder and astonishment.
The monks mocked the rule of their order by fine vestments and the
use of every kind of food.” Wulstan implored Sæwulf to give up a
livelihood which was beset with all manner of temptation, and to take
the habit; for his conviction of sin was soon over, and he invariably
resumed his former vices. Wulstan told him that the time would come
when he would become a monk, “which” says the Chronicler, “I afterwards
saw fulfilled; for he was converted in our monastery in his old age,
being driven to it by disease.” There is nothing in Sæwulf’s narrative
to indicate that he was in holy orders; more than once he speaks of
himself as one oppressed by a sense of sin; and the record of his
pilgrimage may very well have been translated into the dry, terse Latin
of the monks by another hand, or, conceivably, may have been written by
himself in his last years at Malmesbury.

Whoever he was, Sæwulf’s early manhood was spent in a disordered land
among a dejected people. During the reign of William Rufus, England
was visited by tempest and famine and even by severe earthquake;
rebellion was rife; the Welsh over-ran the county of Chester and part
of Shropshire, leaving them waste; Magnus, King of Norway, swooped down
the Irish Sea, occupied Anglesea, and threatened the mainland; the
common people were oppressed by their foreign masters and illegally
taxed; “the courtiers preyed upon the property of the country
people and consumed their substance,” says William of Malmesbury,
and Eadmer of Canterbury, our best authority on the period, confirms
his statement: “As to their cruelty towards their hosts,” he writes,
“or their unseemly conduct towards their wives and daughters, it is
shameful even to remember”; the royal progresses through England were a
travelling Sodom and Gomorrah. And we may judge of the tender mercies
of the time when we read that traitors to the King, or innocent men
deemed to be such, “were deprived of their sight and manhood.” These
inhumanities also disgraced the far more civilized Byzantine Empire.
No wonder that men’s hearts yearned for a “City of God,” or that their
hearts were set on the peace of the convent, or that they disdained the
mere perils of pilgrimage!

The existing fragment of Sæwulf’s narrative begins with his departure
from Southern Italy; but we know, from other sources, what were the
conditions and prescribed forms of pilgrimage, and how an English
pilgrim would reach Apulia.

First, he had to get the consent of near relatives, in order that the
interests of his family or dependents might be protected. To make sure
that the would-be pilgrim was moved by devotion or penitence, and
not by vain desire to see the world, he was also required to secure
the sanction of his bishop, who made investigation into his life
and character before granting it. The enquiry was a very searching
one in the case of a monk; for his real motive might be to escape
from conventual discipline. If satisfied, the Bishop or his delegate
solemnly presented him with a pilgrim’s staff and wallet, and bestowed
his benediction at Mass in the church of the parish in which the
pilgrim resided. He was furnished with a document which exhorted all
monasteries, priests, and faithful Christians to give him aid and
relief on his journey. He was now bound to set off without delay,
under penalty of being dealt with as a backslider and perjurer. When
the day of departure arrived, a procession of relatives, friends, and
pious people accompanied him some little distance, and then, having
been blessed by the clergy present, clad in white linen with the cross
marked on it, and duly sprinkled with holy water, he went on his way
alone.

The long and hazardous sea-voyage to the Mediterranean was shunned.
Despite the perturbed state of the Continent, it was safer to make
for the heel of Italy by the overland route. All men who bore arms
were under the obligation to defend him; no robber-baron might demand
a toll from him—nay the castle welcomed him, and he was seated at
table beside the house-priest. The bishop of every town and the abbot
or prior of every monastery gave him shelter and hospitality; alms
were specially devoted to the relief of the poor pilgrim and the
support of monasteries along the pilgrim’s path. If he were ill, the
doors of whatever hospital might be near were open to him, or he was
cordially received into the Infirmary of every convent. A pilgrim’s
hospice, founded in the first half of the ninth century by Louis the
Pious, stood amid the snowy wastes of Mont Cénis to shelter him from
its bitter blasts. He would pass through Italy, little affected by the
unceasing and bloody conflict of noble with bishop, bishop with city,
city with noble, and every one of a thousand petty communes and fiefs
with its neighbours; for the charitable monastery would prove a ready
asylum. Arrived at a convenient port, a greatly reduced passage-money
was required of a pilgrim to the Holy Land; and there were some ports
where ships belonging to them were compelled to carry pilgrims free of
all charge.

Mediterranean shipping was not notably different in build and badness
from that of Northern waters; but was often of larger size. Nearly all
that we know about it is derived from the uncouth paintings, coins,
and arms of maritime towns of a somewhat later period, which are
rather symbols than representations. The sailing-ship was shorter than
the galley, which was rowed as well as sailed; it was shaped somewhat
like a half-moon and was very broad in the beam. It could sail only
before the wind. There was rarely more than a single mast; the sails
were square; and the yards could be lowered to the deck like those
of a modern barge. These ships were not unlike the clumsy coasters
still to be met with off Norway. Passengers were very uncomfortably
crowded together, and must have had a terrible time. The outside
planks overlapped, and were held together by iron nails; and the seams
were stopped up with oakum. Mediæval vessels were crazy craft, and
frequently went to pieces when wind and wave ran high: he was a bold
traveller who tempted Neptune in those days, and especially bold if,
after a first experience, he braved the sea god a second time.

Brindisi was the usual place of embarquation; but for some reason,
which Sæwulf does not state, he started from Monopoli, a little port
midway between Bari and Brindisi. Now there was a general belief in
certain days being unlucky; a belief which persisted in spite of the
condemnation of the Church. A Christian Calendar of the early part
of the 4th century indicates what days are of ill omen, according to
the Astrology of Egypt. Popular belief credited the feast-day of St.
Mildred the Virgin (a saint of Kent) with this disqualification; and it
was on St. Mildred’s day, July 13th, 1102, that Sæwulf set sail in a
craft rather crazier than most. A storm came on the very same day the
port was left behind, and the ship was wrecked a short distance from
the harbour; but, “by Divine Mercy,” all aboard got safely to shore.
The passengers went on to Brindisi; their ship, having been patched
up in some fashion, sailed thither, and the pilgrims got on board
again; but alas! it was another of those unlucky Egyptian days! Corfu
was reached in two days (July 24th); but a great storm arose after
leaving port and drove the rickety craft before it. However, shelter
was gained at another of the Ionian islands—Cephalonia—on August
1st. Here, the company was still further depressed by the death of
one of their number. Cephalonia is opposite the Gulf of Lepanto, and,
sailing up the gulf, they landed at Patras, which Sæwulf speaks of as a
“notable _island_”; not improperly, the word island being often applied
to a port in those days. The ship stopped at Patras for a special
purpose—that its passengers and mariners should go on shore and pray
to St. Andrew the Apostle at the site of his martyrdom. Corinth was
reached on Aug. 9th, and Sæwulf and fellow pilgrims left their wretched
craft to avoid the long, stormy passage by Cape Matapan. He finds a
resemblance between his experiences and those of St. Paul: both had
suffered shipwreck, and Paul met with misadventure at Corinth, where
“we suffered many hardships.” When a pilgrim to the Holy Land speaks of
hardship, it was probably of an unusually severe kind. Roman Catholics
neither loved nor were loved by members of the Greek Communion; and the
behaviour of Crusading hosts in Eastern Europe was too recent to be
forgotten.

The pilgrims crossed the isthmus to Livadrostro, and, some riding
asses, the rest on foot, reached Thebes. They would find Thebes
inhabited chiefly by Jews, who were “the most skilled artificers in
silk and purple cloth of all Greece.” Sixty-four years later, a Spanish
Jew, Benjamin of Tudela on the Ebro, who visited the settlements of his
race in many lands and reported on their condition, found 300 Jews at
Corinth and no fewer than about 2,000 at Thebes, “many of them being
learned scholars, not to be equalled in the land of Greece, save in the
city of Constantinople.” Leaving Thebes the travellers arrived next day
at Negropont (Aug. 23rd). This land-journey had proved untoward; the
Greeks were so inhospitable and so suspicious of them that often they
had to pass the night in deserted huts and sheds. No wonder that they
do not go a little out of their way to visit Athens, in spite of the
fact that “in the Church of the Blessed Virgin there is a lamp which
is ever burning with miraculously replenished oil,” and that Scripture
records how St. Paul preached there and “certain men clave unto him and
believed.” Among these converts was Dionysius, the Areopagite. It may
be true that Dionysius “was born and got his learning there”: we are
indebted to Sæwulf for the information.

At Negropont, the band of pilgrims took passage in a tramp-trader,
which first touched at one of the islands of Petali, hard by Marathon;
but what Englishman of the year of grace 1102, even if he were an
educated monk, knew aught of the “glory which was Greece?” The voyagers
now made for Naxos, touching at various islands on their way; their
mediæval minds sightless to the classic lustre of the Cyclades. Sæwulf
does indeed speak of Naxos as being “near to Crete, that memorable
island”; memorable because his own lively experience of what it means
to “go down to the sea in ships” recalls the “tempestuous wind” which
caught St. Paul off Crete; for certain, he had never heard of that
Epimenides of whom the Apostle makes such vigorous use. Patmos is
reached, where the Beloved Apostle, banished by Domitian, “entered his
tomb alive.” Other islands are touched at, among them Cos, and here our
author exhibits his learning: it is the birthplace of Galen, “the most
famous physician among the Greeks.” However, Hippocrates and Galen were
both physicians, and that is near enough. On the trader goes, changing
its course, now north, now south; and the pilgrim associates every
place visited with some pious legend. Rhodes is reached, and history
is again rescued from oblivion: the Colossus was “an idol, 125 feet
high; the Persians destroyed it together with almost the whole Roman
province on their way to Spain.” Sæwulf, or tradition, has confused
the first conquering onrush of the Arabs with the Persian advance; but
the Colossus was destroyed, not by Persians but by earthquake, nine
centuries before Sæwulf’s time. Yet there is a basis for his story;
its fragments were removed for building purposes about the time of the
first Arab conquests. Sæwulf falls into a widespread blunder of his
unlettered age when he assumes that the inhabitants of Rhodes drew
their name from the Colossus, and that the Epistles to the Colossians
were directed to them.

Leaving Rhodes, a great storm drove the ship straight before it; but
the sailors got her into the harbour of Patara, “and, by next day,
the storm had abated, and we came to Long Island.” Here was a ruined
city which had been the refuge of exiles, escaped from the Turk. Myra,
on the mainland, was now reached; and Sæwulf states that it is “the
port of the Adriatic Sea; as Constantinople is of the Ægean”: either
his geography is not quite accurate, or he would imply that, in his
time, Myra received the main Eastern traffic from the Adriatic, and
Constantinople from the Ægean. At Myra, he worshipped at the empty tomb
of St. Nicholas. Favourable winds bore the ship thence to an island
called “Sixty oars,” on account of the force of the sea and the effort
required to overcome it. A discursion, out of sight of land, brought
the pilgrims to Paphos in Cyprus. We do not expect any reference to the
Cyprian Venus; but we are a trifle surprised to find that our author
now confuses two separate chapters of “Acts” in one jumbled statement.

Leaving Cyprus “we were tossed about by violent storms seven days’
space before we could reach our haven; and one night a fierce contrary
wind drove us back towards Cyprus; but Divine Mercy, Who is close at
hand to those who truly call on Him, vouchsafed no small pity for us
afflicted souls, and we resumed our proper course. Yet, during seven
nights, we were overwhelmed by such a tempest and were in such peril
that almost all hope left us. Nevertheless, at the rising of the
sun, behold! the coast of Joppa lay before our eyes; and even as the
turbulence of our peril had made our hearts to sink within us, so joy,
unexpected and unhoped for, lifted them up an hundredfold more. And so
it came to pass that, thirteen weeks after our departure from Monopoli,
the sea having been our home, or deserted hovels in the islands (the
Greeks not being hospitable), we made the harbour of Joppa, filled with
joy and thanksgiving.” Sæwulf gives no dates; but many have been fixed
by the industry of a French scholar, who compared feast days mentioned
in the narrative with the calendar, and its events with ascertained
dates. Sæwulf reached the Holy Land, Oct. 12th, 1102.

God had interposed on behalf of “the meanest of His servants and the
company of pilgrims”; and Sæwulf renders praise, with the manner of
the Psalms of David in his mind. But yet another danger from wind and
wave awaits him. He got warning from some weather-wise friends who knew
the badness of the harbour. But he shall tell his own tale: “The same
day that we anchored, someone, directed by God, as I believe, said to
me, ‘Master, go ashore this very day, for it may hap that to-night, at
dawn, a storm shall come on and stop you from landing.’ When I heard
this, the desire to land seized me. I got a boat and wrent ashore with
all my party. Even whilst I was landing the sea was vexed; the waves
became more troubled, and a tempest came on; yet by Divine Mercy, I
landed unharmed. What happened then? We entered the city to find a
lodging. Weary and overdone by our long labours, we fed ourselves and
went to rest. And then? In the morning, when we came out of church, we
heard the roaring of the sea and the populace shouting, and everybody
was running in a crowd to the shore, marvelling at such sounds as
they had never heard aforetime. And, when we got there, we beheld the
waves higher than hills, a countless number of bodies of men and women
lying in wretched-wise on the beach; and ships were crashed against
each other and broken into small bits. Could anyone hear a sound save
that of roaring breakers and splintering ships? For this drowned the
outcry of the crowd and the shouting in the ships. Our ship, however,
being a big one and strongly built, and some others, laden with corn
and other goods and with pilgrims going or returning, held to their
anchors still. Yet how were they tossed about? Into what terror were
they plunged! How their ladings were cast into the sea! What onlooker
so hard and strong as to keep a dry eye! Not long did we gaze when,
through the violence of the waves and currents, the anchors parted, the
ropes were broken asunder, and the ships abandoned to the fierceness
of the billows. All hope of safety was gone. Now they were cast high;
now flung down, and hurled by degrees upon beach or rock. There were
they dashed against one another in wretched plight, and, little by
little, torn to bits by the tempest. Neither would the savage blasts
allow of their getting back to the sea whole, nor the steepness of the
shore admit of their gaining safety there. But what gain in telling
how dismally sailors and pilgrims hung on; every hope gone, some to
ships, some to masts, some to spars, some to cross-tenders? What more
shall I tell? Some, overwhelmed with fright, are drowned. It may seem
unbelievable to many, yet I beheld with my own eyes the heads of some
separated from their bodies by the timbers of their own ship. Some,
washed from the decks, are borne away again into the deep. Some, who
can swim, leap into the sea. So, very many find their end. But just a
very few, relying on their strength, gain the land. Thus, of 30 ships
of largest size, of which some were Dromonds” (that is to say, having
two tiers of double oars), “Gulafri” (a sort of galley) “and Catts”
(vessels narrowing to the stern, with overhanging quarters and a deep
waist)—“all full of pilgrims and goods—of all these barely seven were
still unwrecked when I left the shore. That day more than a thousand
folk, of both sexes, perished. Never did eye behold greater horrors in
a single day. But the Lord, to whom be honour and glory, world without
end, delivered me from all this of His grace. Amen.”

The little company had escaped a great peril, but another lay ahead.
Two days later they set forth to Jerusalem, and found the way “hilly,
very rough, and very perilous. For the Saracens are constantly devising
traps for Christians; they lie hidden in the hollows of the hills
and in rocky holes, and by day and night remain ever sharply on the
look-out for those whom they may pounce upon, by reason of their being
few in numbers, or so jaded as to lag behind their band. Suddenly, the
Saracens are all round about; the next moment they are gone. Anyone
who does that journey, may make trial of this. How many human bodies,
torn by wild beasts, lie along the way and beside it! Perchance, some
one may marvel how the bodies of Christians should lie unburied. But
there is nothing to wonder at; for there is very little earth, and the
rocks are not easy to dig, and, even if there were soil, who would
be so unwise as to leave his band and dig his companion a grave all
by himself? He who should do so would dig his own grave rather than
one for his companion. On that wayside, not only the poor and weak,
but the rich and strong also, are in peril. If men are cut off by the
Saracens, yet more in number die from heat and thirst; many through
want of drink; more by drinking inordinately. Nonetheless we and all
our company came scatheless to the place we longed for.” Sæwulf’s
account of the dangers which beset the pilgrim is confirmed by that of
Daniel, Abbot of Kief, who made his pilgrimage four years later (1106,
A.D.) North of the pilgrim’s way lay Acre; south of it Ascalon, strong
fortresses, still held by the Saracen.

The track from Jaffa led to the gate of David, and, entering the
city, Sæwulf visited its holiest place first—the Martyrium or Holy
Sepulchre. The tomb was under cover, because the Church above was so
built as to be open to the skies. He tells us that Titus and Vespasian
destroyed the whole of Jerusalem to fulfil the prophesy of Christ, and
that the city has undergone the same fate seven times since Titus.
He has for guides native Syrians, a people whom he confuses with
the Assyrians and calls by that name. The guides told him that the
Church of the Holy Sepulchre was built in the time of Constantine the
Great. Now, the existing Church was only about 80 years old, and there
had been two previous buildings, of which the earlier was destroyed
by Chosroes II, early in the Seventh Century, and the second by
Mohammedans, early in the Eleventh Century.

He was then taken to see the place where Christ was imprisoned, the
spot where His Cross and the crosses of the two thieves were found,
the column to which Christ was bound (the thong with which He is said
to have been bound is still to be seen at Aix-la-Chapelle); all these
sacred objects of pilgrimage being near the Holy Sepulchre. He was
shown the “navel of the earth,” a spot which a contemporary of Sæwulf
tells us was in the outside wall of the Martyrium, beyond the altar.
Sæwulf assures us that Christ marked it out with His own hand, and
declared it to be the centre of the world. This tradition dates from
the Sixth Century. Readers of Dante will recall that the poet makes
Jerusalem and the Earthly Paradise the Antipodes of our globe; and,
indeed, the Holy City was at the middle of the circumscribed world
known to the Middle Ages. And had not David sung “God is my King of
old, working Salvation _in the midst of the earth_?”

Thence to Calvary; “Which is the very same place where Abraham built
an altar to sacrifice Isaac.” Traces of the Earthquake which rent the
rock, “for that it could not endure the death of its Maker without
breaking asunder,” were pointed out to him. The guides also took him to
Golgotha, the very place where a stream of the Saviour’s blood reached
the bones of Adam, “and he and the bodies of many saints arose.” Again
readers of Dante will think of the passage where the shade of Virgil
tells him how, some time after the Roman poet’s own death, Christ took
from Hades the souls of Adam and Moses and other Scriptural personages
of distinction, with many others “_e fecegli beati_,” “and made them
blessed.” Sæwulf has perfect trust in any information conveyed to him
by his “Assyrian” guides. Indeed, who so likely to know the truth about
this wonderful land as its natives?

Close by the Holy Sepulchre was a little monastery which merchants of
Amalfi had founded 54 years before Sæwulf saw it. It was the abode
of the Knights Hospitalers, who became so famous; but they had not
yet become that military order of which, after so singular a history,
England possesses traces in St. John’s Gate, Clerkenwell, and a
memorial in the beneficent work of which that building is the official
centre.

He saw the “Gate Beautiful,” through which Heraclius, triumphant bearer
of the Cross, entered after his defeat of the Persians; and heard how
“the stones fell down and closed the way, until an angel reproved
him; and he descended from his horse, and a passage was opened up to
him.” The guides took the pilgrim to see that stone which was the
pillow of Jacob when angels ascended and descended a celestial ladder
“and the Lord stood above it” at Bethel. It was now at Jerusalem,
and, traditionally, is the very stone which was transported to Scone,
whereon the Kings of Scotland sat to be crowned, and is to be seen at
the present day, placed below the Coronation Chair at Westminster Abbey.

He was taken to Bethlehem; and complains that there, as at every holy
place, the Saracen had destroyed everything. Yet the Convent of the
Virgin still stood, and within it he saw the very manger where the
infant Jesus lay; the very stone on which His head reposed in the
tomb, and which St. Jerome had brought hither from Jerusalem; the
marble table at which the Mother of our Lord sat at meat with the
Magi; a well which received their guiding star into its waters; and
the burial-place of the Innocents. The story of the Star falling into
a well is also told by that fraudulent Fleming who adopted the name of
Sir John Mandeville, in his “Voiage and travaile.”

As much of Palestine as had been conquered was still the scene of
unceasing disorder, brigandage, revolt and warfare; so pilgrims were
conducted to the holy places under military escort. Sæwulf went to
Hebron, and tells us of the tombs of the Patriarchs, ornamented by the
men of old and emitting sweet odours. The tombs were inside a strong
protecting fortress. Here, at Hebron, he found, still standing, an
ancient Ilex tree, under the shadow of which the Lord had appeared
to Abraham and promised that Sara should bear him a son. Apparently,
his friends, the “Assyrians,” during many centuries of experience,
had found what profit accrued to them in tacking on some Biblical
association to every available object.

Travelling Northward, he visited Nazareth and Cana of Galilee, whence
he beheld Mount Tabor, clad in refreshing green and sprinkled with
flowers. Still advancing to the North, he saw the glory of Lebanon
above him, and the springs which give birth to the milky waters of
Jordan.

More than seven months had passed since our simple-minded,
whole-hearted pilgrim landed at Joppa, and now he turns his steps
towards home. “Having seen every one of the Holy Places of Jerusalem
and its territory, so far as we were able; and our devotions done, we
took ship at Joppa on the day of Pentecost” (May 17th, 1903). Each
pilgrim would take on board with him a palm branch as ensign of his
success, and a few portable _souvenirs_.

Just as war with the Caliph of Cairo prevented our pilgrim from
reaching the Holy Land by way of Egypt (which was the ordinary route
from Western Lands), so its continuance compelled him to return
by an unusual journey. The ship turned from Joppa to the North.
Saracen ships were scouring the sea; and the returning pilgrims found
themselves hugging the shore, although they must pass by that one
fortified seaport which the Crusaders had not yet overcome. Four
days out from Joppa, and when a little to the south of Acre, “behold
twenty-six Saracen ships hove into sight. They were the squadron of
the Admiral of Tyre and Sidon, sailing for Babylonia with an army to
aid the Chaldeans in waging war with the King of Jerusalem” (_! sic_).
This statement is an example of how hearsay may germinate in the
uninstructed mind. It may not, however, be quite so wild as it seems.
Cairo is called Babylon in all Mediæval writings, but, as a matter of
fact, Arabs were, about this time, trying to turn Tancred out of his
fief at Edessa; and Edessa may, perhaps, be regarded as lying towards
the Babylon of Scripture. And a Saracen army was at sea, sent by the
Caliph of Cairo, the new “Babylon,” to raise the siege of Ascalon,
which Baldwin I. was conducting. Probably it was this expedition from
Cairo which Sæwulf came across. “Two vessels from Joppa, which were
with us, laden with pilgrims, left our ship to itself; for they were
lighter craft; and, by hard rowing, fled to Cæsarea. The Saracens
sailed all round our ship, and kept an arrow’s flight off, rejoicing
over so much plunder. However our men were ready to die for Christ;
they laid hold of their arms, and used up each moment in fortifying
the castle (at the stern) of our ship; for we had in our dromond 200
fighting men. After the space of about an hour, the chief of the
expedition, having held a council-of-war, ordered one of his sailors
to climb up to the mast-head, so as to find out what it was exactly
that we were at. And, when he learned from this man how strong was our
defence, he hoisted his high yards and made for the main. Thus did Our
Lord, of His Grace, rescue us from the foe that day. Afterwards our
folk from Joppa took three of these same ships and made themselves
rich men with the spoil thereof.”

Sæwulf’s dromond hugged the coast for eight days, and then crossed
the open sea to St. Andrews’, at the eastern extremity of Cyprus;
thence it made for Antiochetta on the mainland. “During this voyage
pirates often attacked us; but, under the protection of Divine Grace,
we suffered naught, whether from hostile attack or from tempestuous
tossing.” Rhodes was reached on June 23rd; and Sæwulf and some others,
who were weary of tacking east and west and of the slow progress made
by the heavy vessel, agreed to go a certain distance together, and
hired a smaller but swifter craft. Embarked in this, they returned
towards the Asian Coast. A contrary wind detained them a few days at
a place which Sæwulf calls Stromlo (Astypalæa), “once a fair city,
wholly made waste by the Turks.” At Scio, “we took leave of our (last)
ship and fellow-travellers, and began our journey to Constantinople,
in order that we might pray there.” While passing Tenedos, he heard
of the ruins of Troy, and “how many miles of ground they covered.” He
tells us of two fortresses facing one another from opposite sides of
the “Arm of St. George” (the Dardanelles), “which are so near as to
be only two or three bowshots apart, and which thus make the taking
of Constantinople an impossibility.” We have another reference to the
Trojan war: “The Greeks say that Helen was carried off (from Eregli) by
Paris Alexander.” And now the fragment ends, leaving our pilgrim landed
at Rodosto on the Sea of Marmora, Sept. 10th, 1103. It has taken him
more than four months’ voyage from Joppa to reach within fifty miles of
New Rome. Doubtless he found at St. Sophia, as Benjamin of Tudela did
towards the end of the same century, “a quantity of wealth beyond all
telling ... and the like of these riches is not to be seen in any other
Church in the world.”

A long, weary journey, full of the excitement of peril, still lay
before him, whatever route he might take. All we know is that, arrived
at his native town (Worcester?), a procession would receive and
accompany him to his parish church. There he would render thanks to God
for his safe return, and deliver his palm branch into the hands of the
priest, who would lay it on the altar.

Some chance has rescued this broken record of an obscure, unlettered
palmer from oblivion. He is as the hollow voice of a shade which has
burst its sepulture in the silences of oblivion. We catch but a glimpse
of some tenuous wraith; once warm and breathing flesh. It tells us
of a few months in the brief adventure of Life. Yet we recognize, as
in Hiuen-Tsiang, one who, having beheld “a gleam on the mountain,”
must “arise and go seek it.” Sæwulf the Englishman may be but “a poor
thing,” yet he is our own. There lies the excuse for “a poor humour of
mine, sir, to take that that no man else will.”




MOHAMMED IBN ABD ALLAH

BETTER KNOWN AS IBN BATÛTA, THE GREATEST OF MOSLEM TRAVELLERS, A.D.
1304–77.




CHAPTER I.

THE WHIRLWIND FROM ARABIA AND WHAT FOLLOWED.


Marauder as he was, the Arab, like his half-brother the Hebrew, carried
an ethical spark in his bosom which could be readily fanned into a
consuming blaze. He was accustomed, in the silence of the stony waste
and of the stars, to plunge into the depths of his own spiritual being,
or to await, in patience, some portent from the unseen. Mohammed, a
mystic, like unto the ancient prophets of Israel, hating false gods and
illuminated by the “One All Merciful, Lord of Creation and Sultan of
Life,” in trance, in ecstasy, and in paroxysms of enthusiasm, strove
to purge his fellow countrymen of their vain worship of idols and
false gods, and to lead them to the feet of the Almighty. At first he
preached to closed ears; but persistence and enthusiasm prevailed: the
religious intoxication of the Prophet was shared by the unconquered
sons of the desert; the Arab took fire from the flaming words which
fell from these inspired lips, and was eager to carry the message to
the uttermost ends of the earth or to perish in the effort. Within ten
years of Mohammed’s flight from Mecca (A.D. 622) all Arabia was won to
the Monotheist by conviction or by conquest.

The combination of spiritual fervour with a prospect of worldly
achievement is formidable. A year after the death of the Prophet,
Kalid, riding against the embattled hosts of Persia (A.D. 633),
broke into a chant which reveals a baser spring of action in the
Arabian mind. “Behold the wealth of the land,” he sang; “its paths
sweat fatness; food abounds as do stones in Arabia. It were a great
thing to fight here for worldly goods; but to battle in a holy war
is beyond praise. These fruitful fields and Paradise!!!” It was not
religious fanaticism alone, although it was religious fanaticism in the
main, which put an invincible scimitar into the hands of the tough,
tenacious, untamed Arab. He was impelled by religious fervour, without
doubt; but religious fervour had the strong support of a lusting after
possessions, all the more tempting in contrast with the stinted boons
of his desert home. And, should he fall in battle, was he not promised
an immediate admission into Paradise with those sensuous enjoyments,
which were most in contrast with the penury of the nomad tent, and
which were most alluring to the imagination of the average sensual man?

When material greed supports spiritual fanaticism, there is no need
to wonder at success. The Arab advanced against exhausted, loosely
organised Empires, sprawling and decayed; he offered righteous
government, a pure simple faith, with tolerance of the unbeliever under
penalty of a light tribute. The requital of refusal was the sword.
Damascus fell three years after Mohammed’s death (A.D. 635); Jerusalem,
within two year; Egypt, six years later (A.D. 641), and Persia when the
Prophet had only lain a decade in his tomb (A.D. 642). Not many years
passed before Okba swept across North Africa, rode his steed far into
the Atlantic tide, and waved his scimitar over the waste of waters,
lamenting that it put a limit to victory. Thrice was the Mediterranean
coast of Africa conquered, and thrice was the Arab well-nigh expelled;
and then Greek and Roman and all civilized inhabitants of the coast,
preferring the rule of the Moslem to that of the barbarous Berbers
who had replaced him, welcomed the fourth invasion, and settled down
under Arab rule. By the close of the century which in its youth saw
the hurried night-flight of Mohammed from Mecca, the Moslem held sway
from the Oxus to the Western ports of Barbary. At the beginning of the
next century the great Iberian peninsula was added to the dominion
of the Caliph; and, although Ironic Destiny turned back the triumph
of the Prophet in the decisive battle of Tours (A.D. 732), a hundred
years after his death, the great Iberian Peninsula was held by the Arab
from sea to sea and as far north as the Cantabrian Mountains and the
southern spurs of the Pyrenees; while the Koran was preached, although
it did not everywhere prevail, east and west, over a broad belt more
than seven thousand miles in length. The muezzin called the Faithful to
prayers from the Atlantic to the Yellow Sea.

When a race, endowed with natural gifts, subdues an enlightened people,
it becomes inseminated by the higher culture it encounters, and is
stimulated to evolve an art, a literature, and a polished civilization
of its own. So was it when Rome conquered Hellas; so was it when the
Northmen established themselves in France and Sicily; so was it when
the thundering steeds of the desert bore their wild riders north and
east and west, and the ancient Parthian monarchy and the fairest, the
wealthiest, and the most cultured of the Roman provinces fell before
the triumphant Arab. Like the Norman, like the Roman, he had the
natural gift of governing as well as a passionate wisdom. He steeped
himself in the lore of Hellas; it was through him that the philosophy
of Aristotle was transmitted to the Schoolmen; it was through him that
St. Thomas Aquinas was able to construct that venerable philosophical
system, based on the Peripatetic, which has received the sanction and
endorsement of the Church of Rome; it was through him, therefore,
that Dante beheld that “glorious philosopher,” that “guide of human
reason,” that “_Maestro di color che sanno_,” “Master of those who
know,” seated amid a philosophic family. The great names of Averrhoes,
Avicenna, Avempace, Algazel, and Avicebron attest the freedom of
Arab speculation in the tenth, eleventh and twelfth centuries.
Mohammedans were the begetters of chemical science; they eagerly
pursued the study of botany; they contributed much to geography; they
carried medicine far beyond the ancient limits of Galen and Celsus;
they became bold, brilliant and successful operators, and introduced
new methods into surgery; they cultivated letters and left a noble
literature behind them; they were poets almost to a man: Princes wrote
verses to the stars in some interval between private plot and public
slaughter; water-carriers and camel-drivers vied with professional
poets in singing the praises of love in those delicious hours when
the refreshing breezes of the night might carry songs beyond the
lattice of the harem to be received with the light laughter of girls;
even the forbidden wine-flask became a theme for song. Much of Arabic
love poetry is immortal, and few are the literatures in which it is
surpassed. In Architecture and the Decorative Arts, the Arabs achieved
inimitable elegance and grace; as workers in metal they were supreme.
After a prolonged struggle, they subdued and civilized the wild Berber.
They regarded the Jew as a brother, less well informed in sacred things
than themselves; and they treated even the “tritheistic” Christian with
forbearance. Indeed they were not too anxious to proselytize; for the
unconverted were taxable, and they did not wish the sources of public
income to dry up. But taxation was light, and, in the main, the Arab
yoke was far from heavy. Slaves were treated with humanity, and might
earn their freedom at any moment by a simple profession of faith: the
Negro, the Spaniard, the Berber, the Turk, could acquire the full right
of a man by the repetition of a short formula. During the declining
years of the Byzantine Empire, and until Liberty and Literature arose
in the Italian Communes, the Mohammedan bore the torch of learning and
kept human justice enthroned.

But Islam was another illustration of the profound truth already
recorded in this volume as one of the melancholy tenets of Buddhism:
Every human institution bears within it the seeds of its decay. Though
a sense of righteous dealing dwelt from of old in the bosom of the
Arab, in his native desert the sword which executed it was held by
his own right hand. The predatory tentsmen were divided into clans;
and between the clans there were blood-feuds. They were a democratic
people; but they had a deep reverence for men of noble blood; and their
feuds were taken up by the chief men of the cities of Arabia, and by
those leaders who, later, became the governors of new provinces. And
the conquered Berbers had precisely the same characteristics: they
also were predatory, democratic, and revered their noble families.
Moreover, both races were readily moved to the more violent of the
emotions of religion. Before long Moslem fought against Moslem, and
a thousand forms of religious dissent weakened, although they did
not destroy, the essential unity of Faith. Again, the extensive and
rapidly acquired Empire was too vast and too ill-organized to be ruled
by one, all-powerful Caliph. The centre of government was transferred,
during the revolutions of Islam at variance with itself, from Damascus
to Bagdad and from Bagdad to Cairo; but the Caliph of Cairo was
defended by, and therefore in the hands of Mamelukes—slaves, bought
in childhood and trained to arms. The Mameluke became the ruler;
and, by the middle of the Thirteenth Century, the Caliph was a mere
nominal Spiritual Head, far feebler than the Pope in Rome. For, distant
provinces were continually falling away from central authority; and it
was never long before the ally who came forward to support the Caliph
found it to his advantage to turn against him. The Mohammedan world was
divided, not merely between the Shiite and Sunnite sects, but between
many ambitious and rival States. Long before the Fourteenth Century,
Islam was past its prime. There was decay in matters political, in
literature, and in art. Yet the amity in Islam was greater than its
discord. The need of mutual protection against the Christian, and
the duty of every Mohammedan to make a pilgrimage to Mecca at least
once in his lifetime, helped to preserve true brotherly feeling among
all followers of the Prophet, whatever their rank, their wealth, or
the colour of their skin. The study of the Koran implied a study of
Arabic: there was therefore a common language to serve the needs of
intercommunication. The Koran was carried into mysterious lands, known
before its arrival only in the distortion of legend and in fables
of romance. Passionate devotion to a Faith which antagonistic or
far-separated races came to hold in common swept away these obstacles
to commutual intimacy. Huge hosts of Pilgrims from many lands met at
Mecca, and different caravans and different sects united in prayer and
praise. Some had encountered peril by sea; all had baffled the craft
or repelled the attack of robber-bands; all had endured trials of the
desert; all had triumphed over those countless dangers which lurked
along difficult ways. Thus, disciplined in endurance and accustomed to
adventure, latent powers of mind and character were aroused. Strange
sights awakened the curiosity of the trader; novel wares excited his
cupidity and converted him into an explorer of the world. In spite
of the intertwining of religious zeal with commercial instinct,
Pagan princes saw their opportunity of enrichment, and welcomed the
Arab, Moorish, or Persian merchant. And, in days of peace, the whole
Mohammedan world was open to every Mohammedan traveller; rulers
received him with elaborate courtesy and sped him on his way, rejoicing
in gifts. It mattered not whether he entered the gateway of some
princely residence, or stood on the threshold of some peasant’s hut; he
was sure at least of welcome and refreshment. The trader might settle
anywhere and find amity awaiting him; an honest man was an honoured
guest in whatever land he might pursue his calling. A Christian,
Missionary to the East, who died in Ibn Batûta’s time, bears witness
to the brotherly love which obtained among Moslems of different races.
So we shall not marvel overmuch at Ibn Batûta accomplishing what even
to-day would be considered world-wide travel, or at his discovering
children of the same father, who in their childhood watched the sun
setting over Atlantic waters, prosperously dwelling in their maturity,
one, where the dawn breaks from the Yellow Sea; one, where the oasis
lies an incongruous and solitary blossom amid the sands of Sahara.




CHAPTER II. A RESOLUTE PILGRIM


Among Mohammedan pilgrims and travellers Ibn Batûta stands without
a peer. He was born in a city which was once an extreme outpost of
Roman rule in Africa, the Ancient Tingis, the modern Tangiers, in the
Sultanate of Fez, 24th February, 1304. He devoted his youth to the
study of the Koran and its exegesis; becoming thereby an expert in
theology and jurisprudence. For, throughout the Mohammedan world the
Koran is the living fountain of all law and of all piety: hence Moslem
theology and law are inextricably intertwined.

“Life is a pure flame, and we live by an invisible sun within us,”
is one of the quaint metaphors of Sir Thomas Browne. The old Norwich
physician is writing of the body; but his remark is profoundly true of
the soul of men. By the time that Batûta had reached the age of 21, he
tells us that he was all aflame with “inner desire and determination
to visit the Holy Places; tearing himself away from those who were
dear to him, both male and female, and taking wing from home as a
bird doth from its nest.” He started from his native city when not
quite twenty-one years and four months old (14th June, 1325), making,
first, for Tlemçen, the capital of a Moslem State 300 miles distant
from Tangier. Tlemçen remains in the present writer’s memory as a gem
set among the Algerian Mountains, remarkable for the ruins of Mansûra,
which almost run up to its walls—a rival city built by a rival prince
during a siege which dragged on longer than the ten years’ assault
on Troy—remarkable also for a master-piece of decoration in that
Thirteenth Century which was the great period of Moslem Architecture
no less than of our own. In this beautiful city rested a Tunisian
Embassy which had completed its mission and was about to return;
and this he joined. When he arrived at Bougie, he became a prey to
fever; but the patient was a man of mettle and he pushed on. Fever was
not the only foe. All North Africa was more or less unsafe, by reason
of Nomadic Berbers and brigands; and hostilities were frequent between
the States into which the great Empire of the Undivided Caliphate had
broken up. The returning Embassy was exposed to danger on its journey
“from the perfidy of Arabs.”

Arrived at Constantine, he received the first of those welcome
donatives which it was incumbent on the Rulers of Islam to bestow. It
was a scarf for head-gear; and tucked in its folds, with considerate
delicacy, were two gold coins.

At Bona, the ancient Hippo, whereof once Augustine was bishop, fever
again preyed on him, and he became so ill that he could only keep his
saddle by taking his turban off and tying himself on with it; nor
could he stand at all during the whole long journey to Tunis. When the
Embassy arrived at its destination, the inhabitants came outside the
walls to welcome the cavalcade. Weak, weary, and worn down by illness,
unfriended and solitary, among strangers who were joyfully greeted
by relatives and friends and fellow-countrymen; remote from all that
was hallowed by family affection or endeared by early association, a
terrible tempest of longing swept the bosom of our pilgrim. He saw all
the others saluted: “there was no salutation for me” he says, “I knew
no soul there. I burst into a flood of tears. A pilgrim saw this; he
came forward and did me courtesy; nor did he cease to take me off my
thoughts by his conversation until I was housed in the city.” This is
the sole occasion on which we hear a word of home-sickness during a
journey which lasted more than a score of years. The born traveller,
like the born sailor, may feel the pang and have it renewed, but he
brushes it aside. Moreover, we shall shortly find Ibn Batûta setting up
a travelling-home of his own.

The Caravan for Mecca was about to start from Tunis; and we find
our jurisconsult become its Cadi, or justiciary. A hundred bowmen
accompanied it through a district always perilous by reason of
marauding nomads, who lurk among its hills. It was the rainy season;
the weather turned so wet and cold that the caravan halted at Sfax,
and remained there some time, hoping for improvement. Ibn Batûta
seized the opportunity to marry the first wife of whom we are told.
She was a daughter of a syndic of Tunis; and probably this was his
first, but far from being his last, entrance into matrimony. For he
was a man of taste, and we shall find him, in the course of time,
become an experienced Benedict, and by no means indifferent to the
charms of his pretty slave-concubines. All delay was intolerable
to Batûta; so, accompanied by his bride, he set off at the head of
an armed band, bearing its standard. He soon entered a district
notorious for brigandage even to-day, when conquering France and Italy
hold the land and bestow sanguinary lessons on wild tribesmen and
robbers-in-blood. Fierce nomads hovered around the little company,
awaiting an opportunity to attack; but happily the caravan caught it
up at one of those tombs of saint or warrior which the Moslem holds in
such veneration. Probably Batûta’s father-in-law was in the caravan;
for we are now told of dissensions between the two men, although
there is silence as to the subject of dispute. If the Prophet granted
the doubtful privilege of a plurality of wives, he mitigated the
inconveniences of polygamy by extreme facility in divorce. Batûta
availed himself of this, and sent his bride back to her father. The
ill-luck, which so soon attended this first matrimonial venture, did
not deter him from a second experiment: he lost no time in marrying
a fellow-countrywoman, presumably also a fellow-pilgrim; she was
the daughter of a dignitary of Fez. The pilgrims halted a whole day
to indulge in wedding festivity. On the 3rd April, 1326, nearly ten
months after Batûta’s departure from Tangier, the caravan drew up at
Alexandria, and his long and not too safe journey along the southern
coast of the “mid sea, moaning with memories,” was at an end.

Alexandria was, at that time, one of the great commercial centres of
the world. Shipping from all Christendom and North Africa were to be
found in its haven. Batûta tells us that it surpassed all ports he
ever saw, excepting Colon and Calicut in India, the Italian settlement
in the Crimea, and Zaitun (Thsiuan-Cheu) at that time the great
port of China. Alexandria was almost as remarkable for Moslem piety
as for trade. Batûta made a point of visiting a learned and pious
person there, who, like all Mohammedan saints, was reputed to possess
miraculous powers. The saint’s acuteness penetrated into the character
of his visitor: he perceived a born-wayfarer in the prescriptive
pilgrim, and told him that he had a taste for travel. “‘Yes,’ was my
reply,” says Batûta, “although at that time, I had formed no project of
distant travel. ... ‘You will see my brother in Sind, another brother
who is in India, and yet a third who is in China, and will bear my
salutations to them.’ I was astounded at what he said, and made up my
mind to visit these countries; nor did I give up my resolve until I had
beheld all three men.” “Only strongly impassioned men may achieve great
results,” says Mirabeau. We shall see what Batûta’s passion was and
what he accomplished.

His keen eye noted the glories of Alexandria; the great lighthouse
of Ptolemy, in the last stage of decay, and that great column of
Diocletian, mis-called Pompey’s Pillar. Stung more than ever by a
divine gadfly, he must run all over Lower Egypt, visiting every living
saint of renown and every relic of the past, especially such relics as
were the tombs or dwellings of departed saints. The attention which
holy men paid to their dreams and the confidence with which they
interpreted them recall the Hebrew Scriptures. Batûta tells us that
he visited an unusually gifted and eminently holy seer; and from
that time “good fortune attended me throughout my travels.” But our
traveller was no mere inattentive dreamer: the minuteness and accuracy
of his observations are remarkable; and his statements are fully
confirmed in the literature of contemporary and later travel, and other
records of the age in which he lived.

Among the places he visited, we find him at Damietta, where was
preserved the cell of the Chief of the Calenders. The very name
Calender recalls one’s youth and those fantastic fables of the “Arabian
Nights” which delighted it. A Calender was a Moslem under vow to
deliver himself from the allurements of earth and to consecrate his
life to things spiritual. It was the usage of all Calenders to shave
off beard and eyebrow; and Batûta supplies us with a story to account
for their disfigurement. The founder of the sect was a personable man,
and a certain lady fell in love with him and pursued him in every
conceivable way. But all her lures and devices coming to nought, she
contrived a still more ingenious stratagem. She got an old woman,
who, of course, could not read, to stop the beloved one, who was as
good-natured as he was devout, when on his way to the mosque, and ask
him to read a letter which she said she had received from her son. He
complied, and then quoth the old woman: “My son has a wife who dwells
in yonder house. Will you be so good as to read it in the passage so
that she may hear what her husband says?” He agreed to this also; but
no sooner had he crossed the threshold than the old woman clapped the
door to, and the love-sick lady appeared, attended by her slaves, who
forced him into an inner room. She cast herself at him, and began to
take liberties with him. So he made the excuse that it was necessary
for him to retire privately. No sooner was he alone, than he whipped
out a razor which he had with him, and divested himself of beard and
eyebrow. Then he presented himself before the enamoured woman, who
was so disgusted at the disfigurement that she had him chased from
the house. “Thus,” says Batûta, “by Divine Providence, his chastity
was preserved, and his sect shaved eyebrow and beard from that time
forward.”

This is one of the many anecdotes which Batûta thrusts into his
narrative. It is much more amusing than most of them. All Orientals
(and Moors are essentially Orientals) dote on pointless fable and
wild romance. They are insatiate for marvel, and gulp down any
stretch of fancy coloured by religion. Batûta’s farrago of stories
is, for the most part, silly. Happily, these legends are short. He
wrought diligently in hagiology; he was a-gape for yarns, remembered
them all and carefully recorded them; for they suited his own taste
and that of his nation and time. They are the gatherings of a man
profoundly learned in the Koran and Mohammedan lore; one concerned,
like the Pharisees of old, with minor questions of the Law and minutiæ
of ceremonial observance; vexed, as it were, about tithes of small
herbs. His main interest was his religion, and in his religion he was
a meticulous pedant. He had a natural love of the miraculous, and
religious credulity case-hardened it. Every mosque was a magnet to
draw him from afar; he made a pilgrimage to every Mohammedan shrine
he heard of; he cannot away without its legend. He reports wonders as
dull as they are extravagant. They possess neither genius nor charm
nor authority. Sometimes Oriental taste for the tawdry is to blame:
sometimes he is flatly gulled. But, in mundane matters, restless
impulses converted the credulous pundit into a man of the world. He
records accurately what he actually saw and heard, or what he believed
he saw and heard. He was interested in all that life had to offer; but
supremely so in all that had to do with Islam.

From the mouths of the Nile, Ibn Batûta approached that ancient land
where mournful memorials stand out, clear and awful, in the flood of
light; where every winding of the mysterious valley repeats the enigma
of the tomb. He came to Cairo, and saw the Pyramids,

  “Memphis, and Thebes, and whatso’er of strange
   Dark Ethiopia on her desert hills conceals.”

He tells us of all in architecture that struck him as worthy of
mention, of the products of the soil, of the habits of the people,
and of their government. He praises the emulation of the provincial
Emirs of Egypt in good works and the building of mosques. He watches
the gathering of great personages at the procession of the Mahmil, or
drapery woven to cover that sanctuary at Mecca wherein lay the object
of Arabian worship ages before Mohammed was born. For the Sacred Stone
fell from Paradise with Adam; and the Archangel Gabriel carried it to
him for the house which he built to God.

Magistrates and juris consults, the great officials of the Sultan and
the Syndics of Corporations, some on horseback, some on foot, assemble
at Cairo and await the Holy Drapery. The Emir who, this year, is to
head the annual pilgrimage, arrives with attendant troops and camels
and water-carriers. A conical box encloses the sacred cloth. All the
nondescript population of the city follow it. By some trick of the
camel-drivers, their beasts are urged to strange screeching; and the
motley throng makes its slow progress round the city, a winding river
of vivid colour and odd effect; a procession not without dignity, but
which an ancient Athenian had perhaps found a tawdry show compared with
the simple grace of the procession of the _peplops_ in his City of the
Violet Crown.

From Cairo, our pilgrim makes his way to Panopolis, then “a great town,
fine and well-built,” and so to Syene, partly following the river where
each new morning mocks the ruined temples, and partly taking short cuts
across the desert.

A holy man told him that he would find it impossible to fulfil his
pilgrimage just then; but he pushed across the unpeopled sands which
lie between the Nile and the Red Sea, and, after a trying journey
of fifteen days, found himself among a “black” race, called Bodjas,
who were settled at Aidhab, at that time a port of considerable
trade. These people wore yellow garments and affected the smallest of
head-gear. They would seem to have preserved their independence by
martial spirit; and, as is so often the case among a warrior-people,
daughters were not allowed to succeed to property. At this moment, they
were at war with the Mamaluke soldiery of Egypt; and it was impossible
for pilgrims to get transport across the Red Sea.




CHAPTER III

A ROUNDABOUT PILGRIMAGE


Now, besides the shrewd reading of Batûta’s character by the holy
man of Alexandria, who saw in him the born traveller, another Sheik
had also read his man aright and foretold that he should meet the
seer’s brothers in widely separated parts of the world. Oracles are
often suggestive and start the way to their own fulfilment. These
predictions actually came about. Batûta assures us that he had at the
time no intention of running over nearly all of the known earth; but by
now an inborn tendency to keep moving had developed into a veritable
_wanderlust_. “A brief space,” sings Pindar, “a brief space hath
opportunity for men; but of him it is known surely when it cometh, and
he waiteth thereon.” Batûta’s opportunity had come to him. Stopped from
reaching Mecca during the present pilgrimage, he resolved to retrace
his steps to Cairo, push on to Palestine, visit its sacred spots and
the renowned cities of Syria, join the Syrian Caravan, and take the
long, fearsome journey from Damascus over the Arabian waste. Here was
occasion to visit holy places only less interesting to the Moslem
than to the Christian, to wander at leisure in notable lands, and to
compare the amazing ways of the tribes of men. He sold all that might
encumber him, and returned to High Egypt. The Nile was in flood; he
sailed down it, spent a night at Cairo, and pushed on, (A.D. 1326).
There was a caravan-route to Palestine, north of Sinai, with stations
in the desert. Each station had its _Khân_, or inn, an institution
which afforded bed and stabling, but not food or fodder. But there
was a shop at each station, where all that might be wanted was sold;
and there was a water-cistern, free to all comers at the door of each
inn. At the frontier of Palestine, there was a custom-house, and a
passport must be produced before one was allowed to cross the boundary
in either direction. At Khalil, a town of Hebron, remarkable for its
beauty, and also for the unusual distinction of being well lit at
night, Batûta admired a mosque said to have been reared by those genii
whom the wisdom of Solomon had made his servants, and whom he evoked
by his mystic talisman. Passing through Palestine, our pilgrim visited
those very few places the sanctity of which could be established by
indisputable record and those very many places which owed their fame
to rank imagination or crafty legend begotten of sordid avarice. He
went to the birthplace of Jesus, because the Moslem regards Jesus as
a fore-runner of Mohammed: and from Bethlehem he came to Jerusalem.
He thought the Mosque there as fine a building as any on earth. It
occupied one side of a vast courtyard, and its fretted walls and roof
shone with gilding and vivid colours. In the middle of the Mosque was a
rock, so brilliant in hue that no idea of its glory could be given. And
this was the rock whence (so says tradition) Mohammed rode up to heaven
on the sacred winged ass.

Tyre, “mother of cities fraught with pride,” Acre and Askalon
were in ruins—the result of the Crusades. Tiberias rejoiced in a
bathing-establishment. Having plenty of time to fill up before the
Syrian caravan should leave Damascus, the pilgrim wandered hither and
thither, backwards and forwards, and saw many famous cities, such as
Beyrout, Tripoli, Aleppo, Baalbec, Emessa and Antioch. He found all
the people who inhabited the district of Gabala sadly misguided; for
they believed Ali, son-in-law of the Prophet to be a god. They neither
purified themselves, nor prayed, nor fasted. They had turned mosques
into cattle-sheds; and, should any pious wanderer wish to pray in one
of the desecrated buildings, these heretics were wont to gibe at him
and shout: “Don’t pray, ass that thou art; fodder shall be given thee.”

Nomads from Central Asia had penetrated Asia Minor and reached the
Mediterranean shore. Here and there they had settled; just as Scythian
and Hun, Goth and Vandal once forced their way into the Roman Empire
and effected lodgement within it before they rose and overthrew it. But
the Emirs, whatever their nationality, would seem to have maintained
decent government. Sometimes the despotisms of Islam surprise us by
such unexpected qualities as sagacity, prudence, and self-restraint.
At Latakia, Batûta found that, when anyone was condemned to die, the
official appointed to superintend the execution was expected to go up
to wherever the condemned man might be, return without apprehending
him, and ask the Emir to repeat the sentence. Not until three such
journeys had been made and the sentence thrice delivered was it carried
out. On the other hand, secret murder was a favourite political engine.
Our pilgrim beheld, on the heights of Lebanon, strongholds of that
military sect, the Hashashin, to which we owe the word assassin. “They
will admit no stranger among them, unless he be of their own body. The
Sultan, El Malik El Nasir, uses them as his arrows; and, through them,
he strikes down those of his foes that dwell afar from him; such, for
instance, as may dwell in Persia or anywhere else. Various duties are
allotted to different men among them; and when the Sultan wishes one of
them to waylay some foe, he bargains as to the price of blood. Should
the murderer accomplish his work, and return to safety, his reward is
paid to him; and should he fail, his heirs receive it. These folk carry
poisoned knives wherewithal to strike their prey.”

Laodicea would seem to have been held by a ruler who, like the
robber-barons of Germany or the pirates of Dalmatia, was a terror to
the trader: “he is said to take by violence all the ships he can.” Like
all travellers, Batûta is enthusiastic about the glories of Lebanon.
He found it “the most fertile mountain on Earth, where are copious
springs of water and shady groves; and it is laden with many kinds of
fruit. And I beheld there very many of that host of hermits who have
left the world that they may devote themselves to God.”

Two thousand feet above the sea-level lay Damascus, most ancient of
cities, with a delightful climate and a productive soil. “The chief
Mosque is the most splendid in the world, most tastefully built,
excelling in beauty and grace.” His interest in mosques and public
worship is inextinguishable; and he recounts the dramatic methods of a
certain preacher. There dwelt at Damascus an imam whose orthodoxy was
not above suspicion; indeed he had already suffered imprisonment on
that score. It so fell out that, one Friday, I was at his preaching.
He came down the stairway of the pulpit calling out: ‘God came down
to the Earthly Paradise in the very same way as I am coming down.’ A
theologian who was there denied this; and the congregation, set on the
preacher and beat him. A complaint was made against this too literal
expositor; he was cast into prison, and there he died.

Islam has always been remarkable for charity. Damascus boasted many
benevolent institutions. “As I was passing along a street one day,”
says Batûta “I saw a slave-child who had dropped a porcelain dish, made
in China, which lay in pieces on the ground. A crowd gathered round the
little Mameluke, and one of them said, ‘Pick up the pieces and carry
them to the overseer of the Utensils Charity.’ This man took the little
slave with him to the overseer, who at once gave him what money was
necessary to buy such another dish. This is one of the best of these
endowments; for the owner of the slave would doubtless have beaten him
or scolded him severely. Moreover he would have been heart-broken. So
the endowment really relieves sorrowful bosoms.” Batûta gives more
than one little indication that children (and even his own wives
occasionally) could touch his heart. The Moslem can be very pitiful;
he usually treats his slaves kindly; and one does not wonder that our
pilgrim speaks warmly about the piety and high civilization of Damascus
in his time. He was licensed to teach in that beautiful city; but found
time to visit the cavern which is one of the places where Abraham is
said to have been born, and the grotto where Abel’s blood was still to
be seen; “for his brother dragged him thither.”

Batûta started with the Pilgrim’s Caravan to the Holy Cities on
September 1st, 1326. Many hundreds of perilous miles lay before him.
The mere solitude of the desert always inspires insupportable dread,
and to secure a sufficient supply of water is a problem not always to
be solved. Batûta was told how, during one pilgrimage, water gave out,
and “a skin of it rose to a thousand _dinars_; yet both seller and
buyer perished.” Ancient travellers always speak with awe of the weird
noises which suddenly break the silence of the desert and inspire a
new dread. Shifting sands cause these sounds. Batûta tells us of one
huge sandhill called The Mount of Drums, because the Bedouins “say that
a sound as of drums is heard there every Thursday night.” But this
particular pilgrimage, although made along a difficult and dangerous
route, was comparatively uneventful, as were all the journeys Batûta
made to Mecca. He gives small space to it, and we shall find the record
of a much livelier and more interesting pilgrimage from Damascus in
the pages of Varthema. The journey was often one of perils, grave and
manifold.




CHAPTER IV

GLIMPSES OF ARABIA, PERSIA AND EAST AFRICA IN THE FOURTEENTH CENTURY


After duly visiting the tomb of the Prophet at Medina and performing
the prescribed rites at Mecca, Batûta, still insatiate of travel,
joined the Persian caravan on its homeward journey, and soon came to
the place where, to this day, the devil is lapidated. “It is a great
collection of stones. Everyone who comes to it hurls one. They say
there was once a heretic who was stoned to death there.” From Medina,
Central Arabia was crossed, and a journey of 600 miles brought the
caravan to a town in the Nedjd which was one of the claimants to the
possession of the bones of Ali, the son-in-law of the Prophet. Where
Ali really was buried is unknown. But the excited mind worked a great
effect on the body here, for, on a certain night of the year devoted
to religious revival, “cripples were brought to the tomb, even from
far-away lands, and were laid on it soon after sunset. Then there was
praying and reciting of the Koran and prostrations; and, about midnight
the halt rose up, sound and hale.”

At Bussora, the port so opulent and its trades so flourishing in the
days of Haroun-al-Raschid, one dared not venture to travel abroad
without the protection of a Bedouin escort: “There is no journeying
possible in these parts except with them.” Yet traces remained of the
former wealth of the city. “Bussora is richer in palm-trees than any
place in the world. Its people are generous and friendly to strangers.
One of the finest mosques is paved with red pebbles. And therein is
kept that beautiful copy of the Koran which Othman was reading when he
was murdered; and the stain of his blood is on it yet.”

In this district he came across vestiges of the worship of Baal.
Certain of the fanatical sect called Haïderia lit a fire of wood, ate
of the burning embers, rolled in them, and then trampled them with bare
feet until all flame was put out. Later on, he saw the same strange
feat done by the same strange sect in India, when there came to a
place near Delhi, where he was encamped, men led by a very black man
and wearing collars and bracelets of iron. “They stayed all night with
us. Their chief asked me for wood to light a fire for them to dance
by, and I requested the deputy-ruler of that part to let them have it.
After the second evening prayer, the pile was lit, and, when the wood
had become burning charcoal, they struck up music and began to dance
into the fire; and they rolled themselves in it. Then their head-man
asked me for a tunic, and I gave him one of very fine make. He put it
on, rolled in the fire, and beat the embers so that the fire ceased to
flare, and it went out. He then brought the tunic to me, and I found
it to be undamaged. And thereat I marvelled greatly.” And between
these two experiences he came across Haïderia in Eastern Persia at
Turbet-Haïdarj: “They wore an iron collar, and, what is stranger still,
their _virilia_ are incarcerated to ensure their chastity.”

He now sailed down the united Tigris and Euphrates and along the coast
of Persia in a small boat, and, landing at a port, travelled across
the plains of Southern Persia, with high mountains right and left. He
found the ways in mountainous Lâristân cut through the rocks. These
parts were governed by a tributary ruler. “In every one of the stations
in this country are cells made ready for those bent on religious
undertakings and for travellers. Every newcomer is provided with bread,
flesh, and sweetmeats.” After two months of travel, Batûta came to
Ispahan, in the heart of Persia. The Sultan had already provided him
with money to cover the cost of his wanderings in Persia. Eastern
rulers regarded munificence as a duty: Eastern travellers claimed it as
a right. From Ispahan he went southward to Shiraz, which he found a
large and well-built city, but inferior to Damascus. “The inhabitants
are honest, religious, and virtuous, especially the women. I went
thither in order to visit that paragon of saints and of those that
have the power to work miracles, Majd Oddîn. I put up therefore at the
College which he founded. He was judge of the City: but, being advanced
in years, his brother’s sons took on his duties for him.... He is much
venerated by the Emirs of that land, so that, when they are before him,
they lay hold of both their ears; which is the mark of devotion due to
the Sultan.”

At El Hilla, on the banks of the Euphrates, he found a curious belief
that the last of the Imams was still alive and dwelt there; but that
he was invisible to mortal eye. “Every day, a hundred armed men come
to the portal of the mosque. They lead with them a beast saddled and
bridled; and a gathering of folk beat drums and blow trumpets. They cry
aloud: ‘Come forth, Lord of the Times; for the earth is filled with
evil doing and deeds of shame. Now is the hour for thee to appear, so
that, through thee, Allah may divide the truth from the lie.’ They wait
on until night, when needs must that they go home.”

“It is an uncontrolled truth,” says Swift, “that no man ever made an
ill figure who understood his own talents.” Ibn Batûta, theologian,
jurist, and, by this time, experienced man of the world, knew his
powers; and one of his powers was knowing how to employ the rest. We
now find him accompanying the Tartar Ruler of Persia, the “Sultan of
the Two Iraks and Khôrasân, to Tabriz, whither the monarch marched with
his army.” Tabriz is not more than a hundred miles from Armenia and the
Caspian Sea. Batûta tells us how his eyes were dazzled by the lustre of
precious jewels which well-dressed slaves purchased to decorate their
Tartar mistresses. The Sultan gave him a fine dress and other handsome
presents; and he resolved to make a second pilgrimage to Mecca;
whereupon the Sultan ordered that he should be provided with all that
was necessary to further such a worthy end. But, before starting he had
time to travel along the banks of the Tigris as far north as Diarbekir;
for he wished to visit a saint and worker of miracles, reputed “not to
break his fast during forty days at a stretch, save with a crust of
barley bread.” On getting back to Bagdad he found the caravan ready to
start, and took his departure with it.

Persia, exhausted by the long struggle with the Roman Empire, fell
an easy prey to the Arabs; and, although it enjoyed a second era of
power and prosperity under the Caliphs of Bagdad, first Seljuk Turks
conquered it, and then Mongolians, under Chinghiz Khân, which, being
interpreted, is the Great Khân, no other than the “Tartre Cambyuskan”
of Chaucer’s Squire’s Tale, the “Cambuscan” bold of Milton’s II
Penseroso. Mongolians had now possessed the land for little less than
a century, and they and the Sultans of Egypt held each other in dread.
Religious differences have always been convenient as a war-cry; and,
from of old, religious unity has been wont to fulfil some of the
functions of our modern patriotism. The Caliph at Cairo was the head of
the Orthodox Sunnites, Moslems who hold the Sunna, or body of tradition
which professes to preserve such teaching and laws as the Prophet gave
by word of mouth as of equal authority with the Koran; but the Tartar
Sultan of Persia was a Shiite, or one of those who reject the Sunna,
and hold that Ali, son-in-law of the Prophet, was Mohammed’s legitimate
successor. Hence Batûta found the Shiite Sultan putting pressure on the
Sunnites of the great cities of Bagdad, Shiraz, and Ispahan to make
them renounce the form of faith sacred to them because it was that of
their fathers and further endeared because the Caliphate at Bagdad had
brought such lustre to the Persian name.

Our pilgrim arrived at Mecca, for the second time, without meeting with
any remarkable adventure in crossing Central Arabia. One is surprised
to find so restless a spirit content to remain three years in Mecca.
But Batûta was a theologian and jurist; one, moreover, who held the
outward observances of Islam in high respect; and he dwelt during the
whole of that time at a Mohammedan theological school. And now the old
passion for travel returns, and he is completely in its grip. He is
away to Jidda on the Red Sea, embarks on one of those Eastern ships
which were even more wretchedly built and worse navigated than those
of the Western nations, and is forced by tempest into a port between
Aidhab and Suakin. Nothing daunted, he puts to sea again and arrives in
Arabia the Happy. A Cadi welcomes the distinguished sage and traveller,
entertains him for three days, and, on the fourth, takes him to the
court of the Sultan at Zebid, one of the chief towns of Yemen. Batûta a
true Oriental delights in pomp and ceremony, and describes the audience
in full.

“The Sultan is to be saluted by touching the ground with forefinger,
raising it to the head, and saying ‘May Allah give thee enduring rule.’
This I did, copying the Cadi; who seated himself at the right hand of
the Sultan, and told me to be seated facing him. The monarch sat on a
daïs, which was covered with ornamental silk stuff; and right and left
of him stood his warriors. Around him are sword and buckler-bearers;
nearer are bowmen; and in front of these, on either side, the
chamberlain, the first men of the State, and the private scribe.
Djandar, the Emir, is also present before him and the officers of the
guard; but the latter keep their distance. When the Sultan takes his
seat, all cry aloud, ‘In the name of Allah!’ and they repeat this when
he rises; so that all who are in the Hall of Audience know precisely
when he sits down and when he rises. Directly the Monarch is seated,
all those who are wont to visit the Court and do him obeisance, come
in and salute him. This done, each takes his allotted place to right
or left, nor does he leave it or sit down unless commanded to do so.
In the latter case, the Sultan says to the Emir Djandar, who is Chief
Constable of the Palace, ‘Tell such an one to be seated.’ And the man
so commanded comes forward a little way and sits down on a carpet in
front of and between those who are grouped to right and left. Meats
are then brought forth; and these are of two kinds, one kind being for
the many, the other kind for people of importance, that is to say, the
Sultan, the Chief Justice, the principal Sheriffs, jurisconsults and
guests. The other sort of viands serves for the rest of the Sheriffs,
jurisconsults, judges, sheiks, emirs, and officers of the army.
Everyone takes the place allotted to him at the feast and everybody has
room enough. I found the same form observed at the Court of the Sultan
of India; and I know not which monarch hath copied it from the other.”

After visiting several cities of Yemen, which were flourishing centres
of trade at that time, Batûta reached Aden, “a large city, but without
water, and nothing can grow there. Rain is caught and stored up in
tanks, and that is the only water to drink. But rich traders make their
abode in Aden, and hither vessels come from India.”

Now the Arabs had sought for wealth in the products of Ethiopia; they
had advanced along the Eastern Coast of Africa, and had established
ports considerably south of Zanzibar. Batûta had a fancy to see these
tropical parts; so he sailed from Aden as far as Kiloa or Kilwa, which
is nine degrees south of the equator. The ship touched at various
ports where there were Arab settlements; some of them by no means
salubrious or agreeable. At Zeila, he experienced “an unbearable stench
from decaying fish and the blood of camels, which are slaughtered
in the streets:” At another station, Mogdishu, he was received with
much civility. “When a ship draws up, the young men of the place come
forth, and each accosts a trader, and becomes his host. Should there
be a theologian or a man of station on board, he is taken to dwell
with the Cadi. When it was known that I was there, the Cadi came to
the beach, and his students with him, and I took up my abode with him.
He led me to the Sultan who is styled the Sheik.... A servant brought
vegetables and fawfel-nut ... and rose-water to us ... and this is the
highest honour that can be done to a stranger.... The people are far
too fat, because they gorge. One of them will eat as much as a whole
congregation of worshippers ought to do.” From Mogdishu, the ship went
on to Mombasa and Kiloa for a cargo of ivory. Batûta tells us of the
productions of tropical East Africa, and how “the greatest gift to the
peoples here is ivory, which is the tooth of the elephant.”

From Kiloa, he coasted back to the straits of Bab-el-Mandel, ran along
the Gulf of Aden, and landed at Zafar, in Oman. He tells us, as does
Marco Polo, how the natives feed their cattle on fish. Zafar “is a
filthy place, plagued with flies by reason of the markets for fish and
dates. Copper and tin pieces of money are used. The heat is so great
that those who dwell there must bathe several times a day; and they
suffer greatly from elephant’s leg (elephantiasis) and from ruptures.
It is indeed beyond a marvel that they will hurt no one unless it be to
return some hurt done to them. Many Sultans have tried to subdue them,
yet naught but bale have they gotten thereby.”

Batûta travelled past the shores of Oman in a small coaster which
touched at many ports. He found the banana, the betel-tree, and the
cocoa-nut flourishing in this corner of Arabia, and describes them
and their uses. Wishing to see what the hinterland was like, he took
a seven-days’ journey from the coast, but found that it took six days
to cross a desert. The inland people would seem hardly to have emerged
from primitive promiscuity; for he tells us that “there wives are most
base and husbands shew no sign of jealousy.” Jealousy as to the harem
is an excellent masculine virtue to our good Moslem.

Crossing the Persian Gulf, the island of Hormuz was reached, whither
traders had recently migrated from old Hormuz on the Persian mainland.
Vases and lamp-stands of rock-salt were among the manufactures of
this important mart and port of call; and hard by were the renowned
fisheries for “orient pearl.” He was told, and believed, that the
divers remained two hours under water, and was astounded to see people
amusing themselves by crawling from orbit to orbit of the battered
skull of a spermaceti whale which had been washed ashore.

Crossing the narrow strait to Persia, he hired an escort of Turkoman
settlers, “a hardy and brave race, who occupy these parts and know
the roads. Without them, there is no travelling.” His object in
returning to Persia was to visit a man of saintly repute who dwelt
far away in Lâristân. It took four days to cross a waterless desert
where the Simoon blows in summer, “and kills everyone in its path;
and their limbs drop away from the trunk.” At Lar, the capital, he
found the saint in his cell, seated on the ground. He was clad in an
ancient garment made of wool. Yet he was in the habit of giving costly
presents, and had food and fresh clothing ready for all who visited
him.




CHAPTER V

TO INDIA BY WAY OF CONSTANTINOPLE AND THE STEPPES


Batûta joined the Persian Caravan to Mecca, and once again journeyed
across the territory of the Wahabi in Central Arabia. This, his third
pilgrimage, over, he resolved to see India. But the wretched ship in
which he put forth was storm-tossed, and finally driven into a little
port on the Egyptian coast. So he made across the desert, seeing, now
and again, the tents of a few wandering Arabs or an ostrich or gazelle.
After much hardship, he reached Syene and travelled once more along the
banks of the Nile to Cairo. And now the fancy seized him to revisit
Asia Minor, see Southern Russia and Turkestan, and get to India over
the Hindu Kûsh. He retraced his old route through Palestine and Syria
as far as Latakia. There he embarked on a Genoese vessel for Alâia, on
the south coast of Asia Minor, which he calls “Rûm, because it belonged
of yore to the Romans; and, to this day many of them dwell here under
the protection of the Moslems.” He was now farther north than he had
been before. One of the petty Sultans gave him and those who were with
him the usual gracious greeting of the East, and furnished them with
provisions. On reaching Anatolia, he found the country broken up into a
multitude of contending States, many of these being held by Turkomans.
The secular efforts of the keepers of wandering herds on the Steppes
of Asia to settle in the rich, civilized countries of Europe and Asia
had established the nomad in Persia and Asia Minor. Successive waves of
conquest had swept over the fair lands south of the Oxus and Caspian,
and, one by one, the victorious tribes settled down and received a
higher civilization than their own from the subjugated tillers of the
soil. But now the Empire of the Seljuk Turks was broken into fragments.
Among the new rulers the Ottoman Turks, a small class of the tribe of
Oghuz, were gradually and with difficulty gaining territory and power
in Asia Minor. But there was as yet no hint that they were destined
to inherit the Roman Empire of the East and to rule from the Danube
to the Euphrates. Some of these little States were ancient provinces,
with splendid and busy cities that rivalled Cairo in wealth and beauty.
Some were carved out of the mouldering Byzantine Empire; some had
been torn from Persia. There were also solitary fortresses and towns
held by Turkomans who lived by rapine and piracy; and some States
only preserved their precarious existence by the aid of a force of
slaves who had been purchased or torn from their Christian parents in
childhood and rigidly trained to military life. These Mamelukes were
sent by their overlord, the Sultan of Egypt.

Yet the tradition of good government was far from being lost. The new
rulers were vigorous and prudent. It would seem that one of the secrets
of Ottoman success lay in that close supervision of subordinates which
recent conquest requires. Consequently, on the whole, the country was
prosperous. Batûta found that the ruler of one province never remained
more than a month in one place. He moved about to inspect fortresses
and see the condition of various districts. This man had besieged a
city for twelve years. It is not without precedent in Moslem history
for a siege to last longer than that of Troy; a fact which shows how
little the husbandman was interfered with in these local wars. Even
in France at the close of the Dark Ages, the tiller of the soil was
safe from the invader of his field if he laid his hand on the plough.
Batûta wandered at large, and was received in all places with warm
hospitality. On landing, he took up his abode in the college of a
sheik; and, on the second day, a poorly-clad man came to invite him
and those who were with him to a feast. He wondered “how so poor a
man could bear the charges of feasting us, who were many.” The sheik
explained that the man was one of a society of silk-merchants who had
a “cell” of their own. The guests were received with much courtesy
and hospitality, and were liberally, supplied with money to cover
their travelling expenses. Batûta learned that, in every town of the
Turkomans, there was constituted a brotherhood of young men to supply
strangers with food and other necessaries. A president, styled The
Brother, was elected by those of the same trade, and even a foreigner
might occupy the post. Each guild built a “cell” for itself in which
food, a saddled steed, and all that might be wanted by travellers was
stored. One of the duties of a President was to call daily on the
members of his guild or brotherhood, and assist them in their diverse
needs. Every evening the brotherhood returned his call; and whatsoever
had not been needed was sold to support the “cell.” Should any
traveller have arrived during the day, he was entertained. Otherwise
“the brotherhood of youths” spent the evening in song, dance, and
feast. On one occasion, directly Batûta’s party arrived at the gate of
a city, two knots of men rushed to seize the bridles of their horses,
and there was a struggle between them. This proceeding greatly alarmed
the travellers, the more so that none of them was able to speak the
language. But a man who knew Arabic came forward to assure them that
there was no cause for fear. The rival parties were two brotherhoods
disputing as to which should entertain the travellers. The antagonists
cast lots, and the travellers went to the cell of one guild on the
first day and to that of the other guild the next day. At another time,
Batûta put up at the “cell” of one who was a member of a society of
youths and who had a great number of disciples distinguished by their
coarse ragged mantles and closely fitting hose. The petty Sultans, too,
would provide horses or provisions.

The ruler of Bigni, a man proud of the possession of “a stone which had
fallen from heaven,” gave Batûta gold, clothes, two horses and a slave.
Although a severe Sunnite, our traveller shows no great religious
hatred to Shiites, Jews, or Christians; but he liked to keep heretics
and infidels in their place. He tells a story which is instructive as
to the medical attainments of the Jew and the relations between Jew and
Moslem. At Bigni an old man came and saluted the Sultan. All rose to
do him honour. “He sat himself on the daïs, opposite the Sultan, and
the readers of the Koran were below him. I asked the sage, ‘who is this
sheik?’ He smiled and kept silent; but when I asked again, he replied:
‘he is a Jewish physician of whom we all have need. That is why we rose
when he came in.’ Whereat I fumed, and said to him: ‘thou dog, son of a
dog, how darest thou, a mere Jew, to seat thyself above the readers of
the Koran?’ I had raised my voice, and this astonished the Sultan, who
asked why I had done so. The sage told him, and the Jew was humbled,
and went away very much cast down. When we returned, the sage said to
me: ‘well have you done! Allah bestow his blessing on thee! None other
but thou had dared to speak thus to the Jew. Thou hast taught him to
know his place.’”

Language-difficulty caused some embarassment during this long journey
through Asia Minor; so an interpreter, who had done the pilgrimage to
Mecca and who spoke Arabic, was engaged by Batûta’s party. But the
Hadji cheated them abominably; so one day they asked him what he had
stolen from them that day. The thief, quite unabashed told them the
precise amount; “whereat we could but laugh and put up with it.”

Batûta embarked from Sinope, on the southern shore of the Euxine, for
Sodaia, in the Crimea. Sodaia was one of the great ports of the world.
Venice had established a factory there a century back, but had been
ejected. The Crimea was chiefly in the hands of the Genoese, who
were established at Caffa; but the Italian cities were in pressing
danger of ejection and of losing their Levantine and Euxine trade.
After suffering much distress on the voyage and “only just escaping
from being drowned,” we find Batûta at Caffa; and for the first time
suffering from the annoyance of those Christian bells which have been
a nuisance, not merely to Moslems, but to the more sensitive among
European ears from the days when they were perhaps necessary, yet when
Rabelais objurgated them in his chapter on the “Island of bells,” to
these modern times of clocks and watches. In all these cosmopolitan
towns, each nation occupied a separate fortified quarter. The trade of
Southern Russia was great; and one is surprised to find that horses
were exported to India.

Batûta made across a land where the quiet air was no longer annoyed by
the insistent clang which was an insult at once to his faith and his
ears. He found Southern Russia a plain without hill or tree. Waggons
might travel for six months through a green desert, the silence broken
only by lowing of cattle, hoarse voice of an occasional herdsman,
or languid stir of some collection of huts which passed for a town.
Cattle were protected by severe laws severely enforced. “Should a
beast be stolen, the thief must return it with nine more. If unable to
furnish these, his children are taken into slavery; and, if he have no
children, he is slaughtered like a sheep.... The only fuel is dung.”

Batûta was bent on visiting Uzbek Khân, the powerful Tartar who now
represented the dynasty founded by Chinghiz Khân, the blacksmith. Uzbek
was one of the seven mightiest monarchs of the world, the others being
the Sultan of the West; the Sultan of Egypt and Syria, the Sultan
of the two Iraks (Persia and Mesopotamia), the Khân of Turkestan,
the Sultan of India, and the Emperor of China. Our traveller hired
a waggon, and, after many monotonous days, arrived at the camp of
the Khân. He was amazed to behold “a city in motion; complete in its
streets, mosques, and cooking houses.” Nor was he less bewildered at
the consideration given to women by all men, from the Khân downwards,
and at seeing them going about unveiled, yet “religious, charitable,
and given to good works.” The wife of an Emir would ride, magnificently
attired, in a coach. “Often she is accompanied by her husband; but one
would take him for a mere attendant.” Uzbek Khân was “wont to give
audience on Friday, his four wives, unveiled, sitting enthroned to
right and left of him, a son on either side, and a daughter in front.
Princes and Emirs are gathered around. People enter into the presence
in order of rank. When a wife comes in, he takes her by the hand and
leads her to her throne. Each wife has a separate abode; and not to
visit these ladies is looked upon as a breach of good manners.” It is
evident that the ancestral habits of a nomadic people were carefully
preserved under conditions which were rapidly changing. The Sultan sent
his visitor a horse, a sheep, and koumiss in a leathern bottle.

Batûta wished to see for himself the great change in the length of day
and night which takes place as one travels northward. So Uzbek sent
him to far-distant Bulgar, on the Volga, a place in the latitude of
Newcastle. Here he was told of a “Land of Darkness,” which lay forty
days’ journey to the North. “Traders alone go there; and only in big
companies. Dogs draw them over the ice in sledges; and the travellers
must take all food and wood for fuel with them. The dogs are fed before
anyone, and experienced dogs, who have done the journey several times,
are chosen to lead the pack. On arriving at the proper place, each
trader puts down his goods and retires. Next day, he finds furs put
down as barter. Should he be content with these, he carries them off;
but should he not be satisfied, he leaves them where they are, and more
are added. But sometimes the natives will take back their own goods,
and leave those of the traders. The traders never see anyone, and know
not whether they deal with human beings or with demons.” Strange as
this practice seems, there is other evidence that exchange of goods was
made in this way in very high latitudes. Sledge-dogs were used very
much farther south than they are to-day. Batûta speaks of the Russians
as being “Christians with red hair, blue eyes, ugly, faithless, and
rich in silver shrines.”

When Batûta returned to Uzbek, he went on to Astrakhan with him. “Here
the Sultan dwells in very cold weather.... The city is on one of the
great rivers of the world (the Volga), which is crossed by laying
thousands of bundles of hay on the ice.”

Now, the third of Uzbek’s four wives was a daughter of the Christian
Emperor of Constantinople. History makes no mention of this lady; but
there is no reason to doubt the fact, however surprising; for, since
1265 A.D. the Byzantine Emperor had more than once given a natural
daughter or legitimate sister in marriage to powerful Mongolian
Sovereigns, in order to get their support against the encroaching Turks
of Asia Minor.

This particular lady was expecting her confinement and desired to
return home for the event. She had requested the Khân to allow her to
do so, and he had sanctioned the journey. Batûta saw an opportunity of
seeing the famous Christian metropolis, if the Khân would allow him
to join the escort. Such a petition from a foreign stranger naturally
aroused suspicion as to his motives; but Batûta was skilful in allaying
this; and we find him setting forth with a parting gift from the Khân
of a fine dress, several horses, and cash. Even the Khân’s ladies and
his sons and daughters gave him presents. The princess was escorted
by 500 horse and 4,500 foot. The Khân, accompanied by his head-wife
and heir-apparent rode with her the first stage; the heir-apparent and
his suite went on the next stage of a journey that took two months.
For some reason or other a very round-about route was chosen; first a
waterless, uninhabited waste was crossed; then the Caucasus approached
to within a day’s march. When a border-fortress was reached, the escort
returned; and now the real motive of the lady becomes discernable. The
unhappy woman had been the victim of state-craft, a puppet danced off
to a semi-barbarian husband in the interests of Constantinople. In
spite of the respect paid to women in her new abode, she was heartily
sick of Tartar discomfort and Moslem ways. Accustomed to the luxurious
ease and refinements of the Byzantine Court, she loathed the uncouth
manners of a half-tamed people and their rough life. She sighed for the
amenities of her father’s palace and the high civilization of his city.
She left her travelling mosque at the fortress, drank wine, and is said
to have eaten swine’s flesh. From Batûta’s point of view, she relapsed
into infidelity; yet he has no bitter word to cast at her. When a
day’s journey from her native city, a younger brother came to meet her
with 5,000 cavalry, all in shining armour. Next day the heir-apparent
arrived with 10,000 cavalry, and when quite near to Constantinople,
the greater part of the population turned out, decked in their best,
and shouting so that it was difficult to decide whether they or the
drums made most noise. The parents came forth from the gate in full
royal state, and the poor released princess threw herself on the ground
before them, kissed it, and even kissed the hooves of their horses. All
the bells of Constantinople were a-ringing, and the royal party entered
the city with glittering pomp.

Batûta was unwilling to enter “Istambûl” without the Emperor’s special
sanction; it was not too safe a place for a Moslem. Andronicus
Palæologus the Younger gave him a safe-conduct; but he was searched
for concealed arms at the fifth gate—a practice which, afterwards, he
found to obtain in India. As he passed through the gateways the guards
muttered: “Saracens! Saracens!” And Saracens they had indeed occasion
to hold in mortal horror and dread.

Our pilgrim-traveller gets sadly muddled about names and dates just
here. Evidently, he derived the information he gives us from a Jew,
who acted as interpreter, and who either spoke Arabic imperfectly
or heartily enjoyed “pulling his leg.” And as to dates, just here,
Batûta’s memory fails him a little. He was told that the Pope of
Rome paid an annual visit to Santa Sophia, and was received with
the greatest veneration and ceremonial. And he calls the Emperor
Andronicus, “George.” Andronicus plied him with eager questions as to
Jerusalem and the Holy Places of Palestine. He only saw the outside of
Santa Sophia.

Now, the Princess made open objection to return to her husband, and had
her will. She gave Batûta a money-present for his services; but the
Byzantine Empire was in decay, and, to his loss in exchange, the coins
debased. He returned Eastward with a small escort, and met Uzbek Khân
at Sara. We read in Dan Chaucer how

  “At Sarray, in the land of Tartarye
   Ther dwelt a king that werreyed Russye.”

Nothing will content him but to see those famous cities beyond the
Oxus, and Balk, with its great mosque of the precious pillars, before
he proceeds to India. He travels 40 days through a desert. The whole
district is one vast desolation; and he tells us how Chinghiz Khân,
the blood-stained blacksmith, a conquering hero, a strict Moslem, and
therefore “a man of liberal mind,” subdued district after district
until he was lord of China and the Middle East; how he carried off the
youth of Bokhâra and Samarkand, Khôrasân and Irak, and slaughtered and
pillaged so that he left nothing but ruin behind him. Batûta visited
the Great Khân of Turkestan and more than one camp of petty rulers.

“The purple robe makes Emperors, not priests,” said Ambrose the Bishop
of Milan to the Emperor Theodosius; and the Emperor remarked how hard
it was for a ruler to meet with an outspoken and unfearing man. Batûta
tells us of an amusing incident which indicates, not merely how an
imam could be outspoken to a king, but also that, if Mohammedanism
had admitted of a sacerdotal hierarchy, the same exercise of priestly
authority which cast Theodosius prostrate and weeping before the Altar
at Milan and kept Heinrich shivering in the snows of Canossa, while
awaiting the condescension of Hildebrand, would have obtained in the
Moslem as in the Christian world. When Tirim Siri Khân wished prayers
to be delayed until he should come to the mosque, the imam bade the
messenger return to the Khân and ask him whether prayers were ordered
of God or of him, and commanded the muezzin to summon the faithful as
usual. After the second prostration the Khân arrived, meekly remained
at the doorway, and joined in the prayers. When worship was over, he
grasped the hand of the imam, who laughed heartily, and the twain
sat together afterwards, Batûta being with them. The Khân told the
traveller to declare to his countrymen how the Ruler of the Turkomans
had sat with a poor man of the poorest Persians. This worthy imam lived
by the labour of his hands, and refused all the gifts his sovereign
offered him. No wonder that warm friendship sprang up between these two
men, and that both were respected and obeyed. But greater regard was
paid to the statutes than to this monarch even; for, after Batûta left,
Tirim Siri broke a law laid down by his grandfather and therefore was
deposed.

In one province he found “a laudable practice. A whip is hung up in
every mosque, and whoever stays away from worship is beaten by the imam
before all the congregation, and fined to boot, the fine going towards
the upkeep of the mosque.” The time came when Batûta, clothed with
authority, itched to exercise it in the same praiseworthy way.

Batûta now visits Herat, turns north-westward to Meshed, the capital
of Khôrasân and holy city of the Shiites, thence travels to Jam, the
birthplace of Jami, the Persian poet, and at Tus finds the tomb of the
Caliph Haroun-al-Raschid, who died there when on a military expedition.
Now, Haroun-al-Raschid was a Sunnite; so the orthodox “place lighted
candles on his grave, but the followers of Ali (Shiites) are wont to
give it a kick.” One recalls the story of how, when the Indian Emperor
had his attention drawn to a dog defiling the grave of a heretic, he
remarked that “the beast resembles orthodoxy.” Heterodox or orthodox,
according to point of view, here were flourishing colleges filled with
students, and saintly men dwelling in secluded cells. To work miracles
has always been a distinction of the saint; but the Eastern saint was
also permitted to live on to an age incredibly ripe. Batûta is always
running across some man of the age attained by old Parr, and upwards. A
century and a half is a moderate number of years for these holy beings,
and Batûta accepts it as veridical; especially when corroborative
evidence is given. But three and a half centuries claimed by a man who
is no Struldbrug, but looks not more than fifty, staggers even him. The
impostor assures his visitor that every century he grows a fresh crop
of hair and cuts a new set of teeth, and that he had been a Râja who
was buried at Multân in the Punjâb. “I very much doubted as to what he
might really be; and I do so to this day.”




CHAPTER VI

AN EASTERN DESPOT


He waited forty days for the snows to melt on the “Hindu Kûsh—the
Slayer of the Hindus, so called because most of the slaves brought from
India die here of the bitter cold thereof.” The Afghans were at that
time subjects of the Khân of Turkestan (Transoxiana); a turbulent,
violent race, impatient of the slightest curb. Bandits attacked the
party he joined in the Kâbul pass; but bow and arrow kept them at a
distance. Fierce invaders had poured down the mountain passes from
Afghanistan from the end of the twelfth century and established a
Mohammedan Empire at Delhi.

Batûta passed into Sind. At the Indian border the usual written
description of his personal appearance and the object of his visit was
sent to the Sultan. There was a system of stations at a short distance
from each other, and couriers of the Sultan went to and fro, some on
horseback, some on foot. To secure rapid transit, each courier was
provided with bells attached to a whip, so as to announce his approach
to a station and to warn the courier there to be ready to go on with
the royal despatch.

Now, the Mohammedan Sultan of Northern India was a striking
illustration of the fact that humanity is not necessarily coupled
with generosity. Mohammed Tughlak was renowned throughout the Moslem
world for his lavish munificence; but the cold-blooded cruelty of the
despot was not less great than his bounty. Batûta not merely wished to
see India; he hoped to achieve lucrative establishment at the Moslem
Court. At Multân he found a body of adventurers, who sought to place
their talents at the service of the Sultan, and awaited his invitation
to court. Any shipwrecked sailor, even, had only to make his way to
Mohammed Tughlak to be relieved. Batûta has tales of him which we may
believe at our pleasure. The Sultan told one of his courtiers to go
to the treasury and take away as much gold as he could carry. He took
so much that he fell under its weight. The Sultan ordered the coins to
be gathered together, weighed, and sent to him. Once he had one of his
Emirs put into a balance, and gave him his weight in gold, kissing him,
and telling him to bestow alms for his soul’s welfare. He kissed the
feet of a “theologian and gatherer of traditions,” and presented him
with a golden vase filled with gold coins.

On the way, Batûta saw one of the three brothers whom the Sheik at
Alexandria had prophesied he should meet, and found him “a man very
much broken by temptations of the devil. He would not allow any one
to touch his hand or even to draw near him; and, should anyone’s garb
chance to touch his, he washed it immediately.” On the road from
Multân to Delhi, Batûta was most hospitably received by the Emirs. But
Northern India was no more reduced to order by the Mohammedan Sultan
than by the Emperor Sîlâditya in Hiuen-Tsiang’s time. Between Multân
and Delhi, while travelling with a party of twenty-two, Batûta found
two horse and twenty foot opposing their progress. Our pilgrim was
a many-sided man, quite capable of taking his share in a fight. The
robbers lost one of their horsemen and twelve of their foot, and then
fled from the field.

When Ibn Batûta arrived at the Moslem capital, which was ten miles to
the south of the Delhi of our day, he found that the Sultan was not
there. But great honour was done to the man whose fame as theologian,
jurist, traveller and three-fold hadji had preceded him. He was
received and entertained by the Sultan’s Mother and the Vizier, and
received a welcome present of money in return for the presents he had
brought with him.

A month and a half after his arrival a child of one of his numerous
marriages died. She was a little less than a year old. “The vizier
gave her funeral honours as if she had been a child of high rank in
that country, with incense, rose-water, readers of the Koran, and
panegyrists. And the vizier paid all the costs thereof, giving money to
the leaders and food to the poor. This was done by the Sultan’s orders.
And the Dowager Sultana sent for the mother of the child, and gave her
valuable dresses and ornaments; which was much to her solace.”

News now came that the Sultan was drawing near; so the vizier and
others set forth to meet him. Everybody, the adventurers in search of
employment included, bore presents to the palace, of which the sentries
at the palace-gateway took note. When the Sultan arrived, these gifts
were spread out before him, and the travellers were presented to him in
order of rank. Batûta was received with special marks of approval. The
Sultan graciously condescended to take his hand, promised to see to his
interests, and gave him cloth of gold which had adorned his own person.
Each visitor had a horse and silver-saddle sent him, and was appointed
either judge or writer. Batûta was made Judge of Delhi, with a stipend
and the rents of three villages attached to his office. When the
messengers brought news of these appointments, the new functionaries
were expected to kiss the hooves of their horses, go to the palace, and
invest themselves with their robes of office.

Batûta gives an account of the Sultan which is confirmed by Ferishta,
the Moslem historian. Mohammed was a typical Oriental sovereign of
the first order, that is to say, a man of letters and learning,
“approachable, one of the most bountiful of men, splendid in his gifts
(where he took a fancy).” But despotism breeds tyranny, and tyranny,
brutality. “Notwithstanding his humility, justice, kindness to the
poor, and marvellous open-handedness, he was swift to shed blood.
Hardly a day went by without someone being slaughtered before the gates
of his palace. Often have I seen people suffer there, and their bodies
left where they fell. Once, as I rode up, my horse plunged and quivered
with fear. I looked ahead, and saw something white lying on the ground.
I asked what it might be. One who was with me replied: ‘it is the
trunk of a man who has been dismembered.’ It made no difference whether
the offence were great or small; the punishment ordered by the Sultan
was the same. He spared none on account of his learning, his upright
character, or his position. Daily, hundreds of prisoners were brought
to the audience-chamber, arms chained to neck, and feet pinioned.
Some were killed, some tortured, some severely beaten. He sat in his
Audience Hall every day, Fridays excepted, and had everybody in prison
brought before him. But Friday was a day of respite for them; then they
kept calm and purified themselves.

“The Sultan had a brother. Never have I seen a finer man. The monarch
suspected that he had plotted against him. He questioned him concerning
this; and, for fear of being put to the torture, the brother made
avowal. But, in fact, whoever should deny any charge of this kind which
the Sultan might choose to make would most assuredly be put to the
torture; and death is usually chosen. The Sultan had his brother’s head
cut off in the middle of the courtyard, and, as is the custom, there
it remained three days. This man’s mother had been stoned to death in
the same place two years before; for she had confessed to adultery or
some debauchery.... On one occasion, when I was present, some men were
brought forward and charged with having conspired to kill the vizier.
They were sentenced to be thrown to the elephants. These beasts are
trained to put an end to culprits, their feet being shod with steel
with a sharp edge to it. They are guided by riders, take up their
victim with their trunks, hurl him up into the air, thrust him between
their fore-feet, and do to him just what the riders bid them, and
that is whatever the Sultan has ordered. If the command be to cut the
victims to pieces, the elephant shall do this with his tools, and then
shall cast the pieces to the crowd gathered around; but if it be to
leave him, he is flayed before the monarch, his skin stuffed with hay,
and his flesh given to dogs.”

This genial sovereign had craftily contrived to bring about the death
of his father and a brother by the collapse of a pavilion. But the
reign of every Sultan was polluted by parricide or fratricide in the
frantic struggle for the throne. And, even more than has been the case
throughout history, all the ostentation, luxury, and culture of the
Court, the powerful, and the wealthy, was as fine meal ground from the
ear which the humble had sown and reaped. The people were crushed,
enslaved, outraged and despoiled.

A case was brought before our judge which reveals that the trial by
ordeal, of which Hiuen-Tsiang told us, was still employed. A woman
reputed to be a _Goftar_, that is to say, a witch who could kill
anyone by a glance, was brought before Batûta on the charge of having
murdered a child. Not knowing what to do, he sent her on to the vizier,
who ordered four large water-vessels to be tied to her, and the whole
bundle to be thrown into the Jumna. Had she sunk, she would have been
deemed innocent and pulled out. Alas! she floated; so she was taken
away to be burned.

One day, two Yogis, master and disciple, arrived at the Sultan’s court.
Their heads and armpits were bare, the hair having been removed by
means of some kind of powder. They were received with much respect; and
Batûta was treated to an exhibition of that Eastern skill in jugglery
which astonished all ancient travellers. The disciple assumed the
shape of a cube, rose in the air, and floated over the heads of the
spectators. Our judge was so frightened at this uncanny trick that he
fainted. When he came to, the disciple was still up above his head. The
head-conjurer then cast a sandal to the ground. It rebounded, hit the
cube, which descended, and lo! there was the disciple again. Batûta’s
heart beat at such a rate that the Sultan ordered a powerful drug to be
given him, and told him that he should have been shewn more astounding
things, but that he feared for his wits. Probably, however the illusion
was produced, our traveller saw something very much like what he
describes. Marco Polo and other old travellers tell of the astounding
feats they saw, and Jehangir, fourth in succession of the Great Moguls,
devotes several pages of his diary to a careful record of many similar
marvels which he would seem to have observed closely.[9] We shall hear
of something stranger yet, which befel Batûta in China.

Our new-made judge was not only a restless being, but one possessed
by an immoderate desire to do things on a big scale. His qualities
were exaggerate, and a virtue tended to swell into an iniquity. One
pious pilgrimage to the Holy Places did not suffice him: he must visit
them again and again. We shall see how fully he availed himself of
the liberty in marriage, divorce, and concubinage accorded by his
creed. Egoism was a strong element in his character. He could not set
bounds to his expenditure. In a word, he borders on megalomania. In a
short time, his debts are four and a half times his total income. His
excuse is that he was ordered to attend the Sultan in an expedition
to put down an insurrection. Many servants are required in India; but
his retinue was immense. He was ingenious enough to escape from his
difficulties. Mohammed Tughlak plumed himself on his real or supposed
proficiency in Persian and Arabic and on his patronage of letters.
Batûta went to him with a panegyric in Arabic so adroitly expressed
that he charmed His Majesty. Then Batûta laid bare his distress.
The Sultan paid his debts and dismissed him with the same warning
which Mr. Micawber gave David Copperfield. The judge was excused
from accompanying his Master, and was given charge of a tomb and the
theological college attached to it.

Encouraged by the Sultan’s liberality, perhaps incited by his example
in prodigality, and untaught by his recent dilemma, he arranges
everything on a stupendous scale. “I set up 150 readers of the Koran,
80 students, 8 repeaters, a lecturer, 80 conventuals, an imam,
muezzins, reciters selected for their fine rendering, eulogists,
scribes to note down absentees, and ushers. All of these were men
of breeding. And I set up an establishment of menials; such as
footmen, cooks, messengers, water carriers, betel-servers, swordsmen,
javelin-men, umbrella-carriers, hand-washers, criers, and other
officials—460 of them, all told. The Sultan commanded me to supply
12 measures of meal and an equal quantity of meat daily at the tomb.
This seemed to me a pitifully small amount.... I made it 35 measures of
meal, and 35 of meat, and sugar, sugar-candy, butter, and fawfel-nut in
due proportion. Thereby I fed all comers.”

There was some excuse for the expenditure on food. Famine is the
recurrent curse of countries with imperfect means of transport, and
“the land suffered from famine at this time. Thus suffering was
relieved; and fame of it borne afar.” But Batûta does not conceal his
having used money which his friends lent him during his stay at Delhi.
Indeed he vilifies them for expecting him to return any part of it. He
tells his tale in the tone of a man who believes himself to have been
treated ungenerously and unjustly.

Later on in his narrative, he has occasion to refer to the fact that
at some time during the few years of his residence at Delhi he added
to the number of his wives by marrying the daughter of the Emir of
Mobar, in Southern India. “She was a religious woman, who would spend
the whole night in meditation and prayer. She could read, but not
write. She bore me a female child; but what is become of either of
them is beyond my ken.” The indelicacy of the dress of women in Delhi
shocked him: “they merely cover the face, and the body from the navel
downwards only.” He tried to get them to robe themselves completely,
and failed.

                                    “How wretched
  Is that poor man who hangs on princes’ favours!”

It seems that the capricious Sultan had placed much confidence in a
certain holy man; but suspicion of the sheik’s fidelity was aroused,
and spies were set to take note of his visitors. Among his friends and
visitors was Batûta. Everybody on the list was ordered to appear at the
fatal portal. Batûta thought his last hour had come and betook himself
to his prayers; he repeated “God is our succour and exceeding help” no
less than 33,000 times in a single day; he fasted for four days, taking
nothing but water and expecting the executioners every moment. He alone
escaped the fatal scimitar.

He had seen enough of Imperial caprice to know that respite was not
security, or innocence a lasting defence. He resigned his office and
went to a worker of miracles, “the saint and phœnix of his time,” who
was one of his friends. He gave all that he possessed to holy men; put
on the robe of an ascetic, and ate nothing but rice. But the blindfold
goddess had him on her wheel, and was to give it many a turn yet. Five
months passed, and then the Sultan sent for him and gave him a gracious
reception. But he deemed it wise to return to his rigorous life, and
was more severe in it than before. Yet forty more days passed, and then
the Sultan again commanded his presence.

There was now a much greater trade with China than in the time of
Hiuen-Tsiang. An Embassy, headed by a high mandarin, had come from
China (A.D. 1342) with presents of 100 male slaves, 50 slave-girls,
rich dresses, quivers of gold, and jewelled swords. In a certain
lower reach of the Himalaya was a plain which had been overrun by the
Moslem conquerors. Once a Buddhist temple stood there; and Chinese
pilgrims were wont to journey across Thibet to pray at the sacred spot.
Moreover the inhabitants of the district were cut off from their
wonted toil in Thibetan fields beyond the border. The place was secured
by Nature from any attack from the North; and the Great Khân of China
begged that restrictions should be removed and permission given for
the temple to be rebuilt. The Sultan was willing to grant the request
on certain pecuniary conditions, but he cast about for some one to
accompany the returning embassy and represent him at the Chinese Court.
Who so suitable as Batûta, a man of the world, experienced in travel,
highly educated, and sharp-witted? His innocence was established. Such
a degree of asceticism, so long endured, was proof of piety. The Sultan
ordered him to go. The garb of the ascetic was thrown off. He would
feel more secure in China than at Delhi.




CHAPTER VII

PERILS BY LAND AND SEA


Our ambassador sets off with the returning mission attended by two
favourites of the Sultan, and a guard of 1,000 horse. He has charge of
gifts which far surpass the Chinese presents—100 horses of the best
breed, richly caparisoned, 100 Hindu singing and dancing girls, robes
of rich brocade, jewelled arms, instruments of gold and silver, silks
and stuffs, and 1,700 rich dresses.

He has not travelled 100 miles from Delhi when he finds a district in
revolt against the Mohammedan conquerors. The Hindus are besieging a
city; the cavalry attending the embassy rushes at the investing forces,
loses many men, but leaves not an enemy alive. The news is sent to
the Sultan, and a halt is made for his instructions to arrive. Batûta
is sitting in the grateful shade of a garden when word comes that a
fresh body of Hindus is attacking a village hard by. He rides off with
an escort to see how he may help. The insurgents are already fleeing
from a hot pursuit, and he finds himself left with only five others
and a few mounted men. His horse gets its fore-feet wedged between
some stones, and he has to dismount; his companions ride off, and he
finds himself alone. Suddenly, two score of the enemy’s horse appear
and ride at him. He is stripped to the skin, bound, and threatened
with death. He is unable to talk the language of his captors, is kept
a captive during two days, and then they ride away. He shuffles off
to a neighbouring jungle, and hides there. He cautiously tries every
foot-track to find that not one of them but leads to some enemy village
or to some village in ruins. He keeps himself alive by sucking wild
fruit and chewing leaves. Seven days have passed, and he is quite
exhausted, when he sees “a black man, carrying a small water-vessel
and walking by aid of an iron-tipped staff.” The man is a Mohammedan,
and gives him water and pulse, which he has with him. Batûta tries
to walk with him; but he is too weak and faint; his feet totter,
and he falls to the ground. The “black man” throws him across his
shoulders; all consciousness is lost, and he comes to himself at the
Imperial gateway one daybreak, the East aglow with the rising sun. That
good Samaritan, the “black man,” stands out in bright relief from a
background of crime and cruelty and shadows of feet swift to shed blood.

Mohammed Tughlak received Batûta more kindly than ever, gave him
handsome compensation, and commanded him to return to the Embassy. On
his way to Cambay, we hear more of Yogi magicians and how they will
remain long time without food. “I have seen, in the city of Mangalore,
a Moslem who had learned of these folk. A sort of platform was set
up for him; and thereon he had stayed 25 days, neither eating nor
drinking. Thus did I leave him; and I know not how long he kept there
afterwards. It is said that they make up pills, and, after swallowing
one of them, can do without food or drink. They foretell hidden things.
The Sultan honours them and admits them to his society. Some among
them eat vegetable food only; and these are the greater number. There
are among them those who can slay a man by a glance at him. The common
people hold that, if the chest of the dead man be opened, no heart is
to be found within; for it has been consumed. Women do this in the
main, and such an one is called a hyæna.”

Batûta’s chief interest was in Islam; but he noted natural products
carefully and was alive to the odd. North of the Hindu Kûsh he had seen
a woefully obese man; and now, on this 1,500 mile journey to Calicut,
he came across the ruler of a small State, “a black giant,” who thought
little of devouring a whole sheep at a sitting.

He took ship near Goa, and the craft ran along the Malabar coast, “the
land of black pepper.” Twelve kinglets ruled as many states in Malabar
at that time, and each king had an army of from 5,000 to 50,000 men at
his command. Many ancient polyandric practices were retained; which
explains why each Râja was succeeded by a sisters’ son. No landing was
made until a king’s son had been handed over as a pledge of safety.
Many Arab traders had settled in the ports, and become wealthy.
Punishment, swift and severe, followed on the smallest infringement of
_meum_ and _tuum_. We are told how a Hindu noble, out riding with his
father-in-law, who was no less a personage than the Râja, picked up a
mango which had dropped from an overhanging tree. The Râja ordered that
both he and the mango should be cut into two halves, and half of the
mango and half of the culprit laid on either side of the public way
precisely where the enormity had been done. One may suspect that the
son-in-law was not wholly _persona grata_ to the despot.

The Embassy had to tide over three months at Calicut awaiting the
season for the sailing of the fleet of junks from China. There were
thirteen of them at Calicut, and they also traded to Hili and Quilon.
He tells us that the biggest junks were as floating cities. They would
carry a crew of 1,000 men, whereof 400 were soldiers. The junk was
worked by oars and sails of bamboo-matting, slung from masts varying
in number from three to twelve, according to the size of the junk. Ten
to thirty men stood to pull at each oar. Garden-herbs and ginger were
grown on deck, and on it, too, were houses built for the chief officers
and their wives. The quarters of the junk were three-fold, fastened
together by spikes. Each junk of the biggest size was accompanied by
three tenders of progressively diminishing proportions. Needless to
say, the commander of a junk was a very important functionary. Often
more than one junk would be owned by a single Chinaman. But then,
“truly the Chinese are the wealthiest people on earth.”

Our ambassador sent his servants, slave-girls and baggage on board; but
the cabin was too small to hold both concubines and luggage; so the
skipper advised him to hire a _kakam_ or junk of the third size. This
he did on a Thursday, the _kakam_ took in its cargo, and he remained on
shore the next day for public worship.

During the night, the terror of the sea fell on them all. A violent
storm came on, and the waters shook the land. Some of the junks
contrived to get away from the perilous neighbourhood of the shore
to more open water; but one of them was wrecked, and only a few
swimmers managed to escape. The _kakam_, with all his worldly goods
and slave-concubines in it, had disappeared; but it had been seen
making for the open. The body of an envoy was washed ashore, with the
skull smashed in. A guardian Eunuch was also cast up, a nail driven
right through the brain from temple to temple. Down came the Zamorin
to the scene of disaster, Comedy attendant on Tragedy, for he braved
the tempest clad with a loin-cloth, the scantiest of head-gear, and
a necklace of jewels, but the insignium of royalty, the umbrella,
was somehow held up over his sacred head. Batûta cast himself on his
prostration-carpet, which was all that was left to him, excepting ten
pieces of gold and his servant, a freed slave, who immediately made
off. Some pious people gave him small coin, which he kept as treasure,
for it would bring blessing with it.

We are told of the noble deed of a simple Moslem sailor during this
great storm. “There was a girl on board who was the favourite of a
merchant. The merchant offered ten pieces of gold to anyone who should
save her. A sailor, hailing from Hormuz, did save her; but he refused
the reward, saying, ‘I did it for the love of God.’”

The junk which held the precious gifts for China was seen to go down
outside the port; and Batûta heard that the little boat which held all
his slave-concubines and worldly goods had contrived to gain the open
sea, and might conceivably put in at Quilon. He set off at once, and
arrived there after a ten days’ journey. He found the Chinese Embassy
there. They had suffered shipwreck, but their junk had not broken up
and was being refitted.

It did not require the advice proferred him by his co-religionists to
deter him from returning to the capricious, passionate lord of Delhi.
He bethought him of Jamâl Oddîn, ruler of Honowar, a man of sense and
understanding, whom he had visited on his way to Calicut. It casts a
pleasant ray on the Mohammedan occupation of India, that there were
no fewer than 44 schools set up in the busy little capital of a small
State, and that of these no fewer than 11 were for girls. Now Jamâl
Oddîn knew the uncertain temper of the Lord of India quite as well
as Batûta, and did not give him too hearty a welcome. So to appease
offended Heaven, or to rehabilitate himself by an evidence of piety,
he repaired to a mosque and read the Koran from end to end once, and
ultimately twice, a day. Now, there were 52 ships being fitted out to
attack the island of Sindâbûr; and Jamâl evidently thought that Batûta
might prove useful, for he commanded him to accompany him on this
expedition. Batûta tried to read the future by a time-honoured method
of divination. He opened the Koran at random, and his eye fell on a
promise of Allah to aid his servant. This was satisfactory to Jamâl
Oddîn as well as to himself.

After strenuous resistance Sindâbûr was carried by assault, and Batûta,
who was something of a warrior, received a slave-girl, clothing and
other presents from his patron. He remained on the island with Jamâl
Oddîn for some months, and then got permission to go to Calicut. For
the Chinese fleet would be returning to India by this time, and he
might get news of his little junk. At Calicut, he learned that his
_kakam_ had reached China, that his property had been divided up, and
that his pretty concubine had died on the voyage. “I felt very much
grief for her.” He went back to the island to find the city besieged
by Hindus.

Now he had heard marvellous things concerning the Maldives, an
archipelago of small islands lying S.S.E. of India, near the equator.
The inhabitants, under British rule to-day, had accepted Islam. He
found that before he or anyone was allowed to land he must show himself
on deck; “for although the islands are multitudinous, each lies close
to its neighbour, and folk knew one another by sight.” He speaks of
the inhabitants as “pious, peaceable, and chaste. They never wage war.
Prayers are their only weapons. Indian pirates do not alarm them; nor
do they punish robbers; for they have learned that sudden and grievous
ill will come to evil-doers. When any of the pirate-ships of infidel
Hindus pass by these islands, whatsoever is found is taken, nor will
anyone stand out.” But, in spite of the moral reflection indulged in by
the islanders, Batûta traces their policy of non-resistance to physical
feebleness. And “there is one exception to it. Should a single lemon be
taken woe befals the offender. He is punished and forced to listen to
a homily. The natives delight in perfumes and in bathing twice a day,
which the heat forces them to do; yet trees give delicious shade. Their
trade is in ropes, which they make of hemp, and which are used for
sewing together the timbers of ships of India and Yemen; for if a ship
strike against a rock, the hemp allows of its yielding, and so saves it
from going to pieces, which is not the case when iron nails are used.
Shells are used for coin, and palm-leaves are used for all writing,
except for copying out the Koran; and the instrument used has a sharp
point.”

Batûta sailed among these islands during ten days, and took up his
abode on one, the sovereign of which was a woman. For the lady’s
husband had died, leaving no male issue; so she married her vizier who,
in reality, ruled. Batûta took the full license accorded in Islam.
He married the four legal wives permitted, and took to himself some
concubines also, “all pleasant in conversation and of great beauty.”
He must have divorced his previous wives before being able to do this.
Marriage in the Maldive Islands was facile and cheap. Only a small
dowry was demanded for a handsome woman; but it was required that
the stranger should divorce the wife on leaving the land, and by no
means take her with him. But, should he not desire to marry, there
was no difficulty in getting a woman to cook for him at a very small
wage. Wives were less companionable here than in most parts of the
world, since women and men took their meals apart; nor could Batûta
get his women-folk to break the custom of their country—a custom
which Varthema speaks of, nearly two centuries later, as obtaining in
South West India. Batûta had been appointed judge, and another thing
that troubled him was the irregular attendance of the lax Moslems
of his island at the mosque. He was very eager that such flagrant
non-observance of religious duty should be duly punished; and he urged
that the best way would be literally to whip the recalcitrants to
attend on public worship.

Now Batûta’s wives had powerful relatives. The sister of one of his
wives at Delhi was wife to the Emir of Mobar; to whom, therefore,
Batûta was doubly related. He had become a power in his island, and the
vizier grew jealous and suspicious. Might not the stranger conspire to
bring an army over from the coast of Coromandel? When Batûta saw what
was going on, he acted at once. “I divorced all my wives,” he says,
“save one, who had a young child, and I went on to other islands of
that great multitude of them.” From one of these, he shipped for Mobar;
but the wind changed, and he was driven to the coast of Ceylon and in
no small danger of drowning. The governor of the port came sailing
by, and refused a landing; for he was no friend to Moslem skippers.
Batûta won him over by telling him that he was on his way to visit
the Sovereign of Mobar, that he was related to him by marriage, and
that the whole cargo of the ship was intended as a present for that
potentate. The Ceylonese Râja of the district was on good terms with
his Moslem brother of Mobar, so Batûta was allowed to land. He found,
like Marco Polo, that Ceylon was divided among four kinglets. He of the
district soon sent for him, and gave him hospitality. He admired the
famous herds of elephants, the troups of chattering monkeys, the pool
of precious stones, and the luxuriant vegetation and glorious scenery
of Ceylon. He scaled that iron chain, which still exists, to reach the
top of Adam’s peak, and gives us the measure of the print of Adam’s
foot, on hard rock; for in Ceylon, as elsewhere, supernatural vestiges
are to be found. He visited Colombo and several other places in the
island, and then set sail for the coast of Coromandel.

But, while crossing the strait, “the wind blew strong, and the ship
was nearly swamped. Our skipper was a lubber. We were driven near
perilous rocks, and barely escaped going to pieces; and then we got
into shallow water. Our ship grated against the bottom, and we were
face to face with death. Those on board threw all that they had into
the sea, and bade farewell to one another. We cut down the mast and
cast it onto the sea, and the sailors made a raft. The beach was eight
miles off. I wanted to get down to the raft. I had two concubines and
two friends with me. These latter exclaimed: ‘would you get down and
leave us?’ I had more regard to their safety than to my own; so I
answered: ‘Get down, both of you, and the young girl whom I love with
you.’ My other young girl said: ‘I can swim. I will fix ropes to the
raft and swim alongside these people.’ My two comrades got down, one of
the young girls being with them; and the other swam. The sailors tied
ropes to the raft, and so helped her to swim. I gave them whatever of
value I had in the way of jewels, amber, and other goods. They got to
shore safe and sound, for the wind was in their favour. But I stayed
aboard the ship. The skipper got to shore on a plank. The sailors took
the building of four rafts in hand; but night came on before they had
finished, and the ship was filling. I got up on the poop, and remained
there until morning. Then several idolaters came to us in their barque.
And we got safe to land.”

His connexion, the Emir, received him warmly. This potentate was about
to attack a Hindu Power; and, while he was away on this expedition,
Batûta travelled about. He tells us that he came across a fakir with
long hair, who sat and ate in the society of seven foxes, and who
kept a “happy family”—a gazelle and a lion together. The Emir was
a ruthless tyrant, butchering women and children. Yet Batûta had no
scruple in proposing a scheme to him for the conquest of the Maldives,
where he had received so much kindness, and where he had left wives and
paramours. But pestilence came and swept away most of the inhabitants
of the district, including the Emir. The new ruler wanted to carry out
the scheme for occupying the Maldives; but Batûta got fever badly, and
very nearly died. When sufficiently recovered, he received permission
to recuperate his energies by taking the long voyage round Cape Comorin
to Honawar, where he wished to meet his old friend, Jamâl Oddîn,
again. But, from time immemorial, the sea had been a no-mans province,
infested by pirates; and the calling, continuous or accidental, of
sea-thief was then as honourable as it was ancient. His ship was
attacked by twelve Hindu craft, and taken after a severe battle. Batûta
was stripped of his jewels and all his belongings, and set on shore
with a pair of breeches on. He lost the notes of his travels with his
other belongings. Out of the way of direct business, the robbers could
be merciful, and there was no reason why they should take his life. He
made his painful way to Calicut, and put up at a mosque—always the
asylum of the indigent. Some of the lawyers and traders here had known
him at Delhi. They clothed, fed, and housed him. What was he to do? He
dared not return to Delhi. A son had been borne to him by a Maldive
wife. He had a desire to see the child. The vizier was dead; but the
queen had married again, and he wondered what sort of reception he
should get. Paternal tenderness prevailed: “I went there on account of
my little son; but when I had seen him, I left him with his mother,
out of kindness to her.” He was hospitably entertained, but stayed a
very few days. The new vizier furnished him with those provisions which
every traveller by sea must purchase for himself and carry with him in
the fourteenth century; and he set sail for Bengal, where he arrived
after 43 days at sea (A.D. 1341).




CHAPTER VIII

OFF TO MALAYSIA AND CATHAY


Batûta speaks of Bengal as the land of plenty. Everything was cheaper
there than anywhere else in the wide world. He picked up a very
beautiful slave-girl for a trifle. But the muggy climate made Bengal
“a hell full of good things.” The Sultan was in revolt against his
lord-paramount at Delhi; and as Batûta was a prudent person, held
Mohammed Tughlak in wholesome awe, and could not predict the issue of
the contest, he did not visit the Bengalese Court. He went up to the
hill-country, half-way to the Himalayan giants, instead; for he desired
to see an aged holy man who dwelt there, one who was reported to take
no food excepting a little milk, and that only every ten days, and to
sit upright all night. This old sheik was a seer, and foretold events
which should befall his guest and which he declares really happened.
Batûta was proud to be justly hailed as “the greatest traveller of all
the Arabs.” He returned from the hills to visit a city not far from
modern Dacca.

We next find him on the Indian Ocean, standing off the Nicobar
Islands, probably because his ship needed a fresh supply of water. The
inhabitants were fearful of strangers, would not allow any ship to sail
in front of their houses, had the fresh water required brought down to
the shore by elephants, and traded by signs; for nobody could speak
their language. The men went about naked, and the women wore a girdle
of leaves only. All were remarkable for the ugliness of their dog-like
faces. Batûta was told that a man might be the husband of 30 or more of
these beauties. Adultery was severely punished, the male offender being
hanged, unless he could find a friend or a slave willing to suffer
in his place; the woman being trampled to death and her body cast
into the sea. The king came down to the beach with an escort of his
relatives, all mounted on elephants. He wore a coloured silk turban and
a goat-skin tunic, with the hair turned outwards, and he bore a short
silver spear in his hand. The usual gifts were presented in dumb-show.
“These folk work magic on any ship that withholds presents; and it is
wrecked.”

Moslem traders called any part of the Malaysian Archipelago, Java; but
the port to which our traveller next came was really in Sumatra. The
Emir of the Mohammedan sovereign received the visitors with customary
Eastern munificence and gave them rich dresses. Our traveller speaks
highly of the Sultan as being a cultivated man who loved the society
of the learned and enjoyed discussion with them. A modern writer says
that the humblest man he ever knew was a duke, and Batûta might have
said the same of some rulers. The humility of the Sultan of Sumatra was
so great that he walked to prayers every Friday! Batûta took a long
journey inland, and tells us of frankincense, clove, nutmeg, mace,
and other products of Sumatra, and of how a man is sacrificed by the
natives at the foot of the camphor-tree to ensure its good bearing.

He was eager to reach China—that land of strange ways and peculiar
civilization in Farthest East. The complaisant Sultan gave him passage
in one of his own junks, provided him with stores for the voyage, and
ordered a guide-interpreter to attend on him. In three and a half
weeks, he came to a place which he calls Kakula, and which may have
been on the mainland. Here he was well received by the pagan king, and
chanced to be present at a curious proof of devotion to royalty. “One
day, a man made a long speech, not one word of which I understood. He
held a knife in his hand, which he grasped firmly, and cut off his
own head, and it fell to the ground.” This sounds incredible; but it
is a fact. The feat was done by means of apparatus. A sickleshaped
knife was attached to a stirrup. The suicide placed his foot in the
latter, gave it a sharp jerk, and the knife shore off his head. Our
traveller was told that the deed was done to make manifest the great
loyalty of the victim, and that his father and grandfather had made the
same praiseworthy exit from life in honour of the king’s father and
grandfather. Their families received compensation from the kings. A
similar case of self-execution was authentically recorded in the last
century.

The Eastern Ocean was so calm that the junk had to be towed by boats.
Marco Polo had the same experience in these seas. Batûta touched at
Kailiki, a port of Tawalisi, probably Tonquin; but no one is quite sure
where this land lay. Even the Sulu Islands have been suggested! The
king was as powerful as the Emperor of China. His people were idolaters
after the manner of the Turks, and Batûta reports a conversation with
his Amazonian daughter, introducing a few words of their language. This
princess could write, but not speak Arabic. Some discredit has been
thrown on this part of his narrative, mainly on the ground of language,
but also because what he has to say about her recalls very ancient
classical stories. But we must recollect that Batûta is relying on
his memory at a time when the events belonged to a far-distant past;
that his work was dictated; and that it was edited by the Secretary to
the Sultan of Fez. He confesses that he did not understand very well
what the princess said to him. And the language she spoke may have
struck him as like Turkish in sound, and hence is given in some sort of
imitation of that tongue. The more one studies ancient travellers and
pilgrims the more assured one becomes of their essential sincerity and
the general accuracy of their observation. We know very little indeed
about the Nomadic penetration of the Far East. That this princess
was able to write a little Arabic, would seem to show that there was
considerable Arab trade with Tawalisi.

This lady was governor of the port, a post which her father had given
her as the reward of her powers in battle. For, once, when her father’s
army was on the point of defeat, she routed the enemy, and brought back
the head of their leader. She commanded an army, whereof one regiment
was of women. Neighbouring princes had wished to marry her, but had
withdrawn their pretensions; for she insisted that first they should
overcome her in the lists; and they were afraid of the ignominy of
being vanquished by a woman. She was amazed at the wealth of India, and
said to Batûta: “I must conquer it for myself.”

Favourable winds and strenuous use of the oar brought the junk to
China. He found that he had to pass through a stringent customs-house;
and that a register was taken of all who left or arrived at a Chinese
port. The captain was held responsible for his crew and passengers,
and to this end an official list was essential. Should the traveller
elect to stay with some other trader, his host took care of his money
and goods, but was bound to return them at the close of the visit, with
a deduction for necessary expenditure. Any deficiency must be made
good. But the trader might, if he chose, put up at an inn. Batûta was
surprised to find paper-currency. He admired the big poultry; but not
the dirty cotton-clothes of the Chinese, nor their relish for the flesh
of dogs and swine. As in Hiuen-Tsiang’s time, they burned their dead.
A portrait of every traveller was taken without his knowing it, and
thus, should an evil-doer try to escape from justice from one province
to another, he was readily discovered. There were many Moslem traders
in China; most of these had settled there; and Jews had found a home in
China for eleven centuries.

Travelling in China was “safer and more agreeable than in any other
land on earth. Although it takes nine months to cross this country, one
need have no fear on the journey, even though one should have wealth in
one’s care. There is an official with troops, both horse and foot, at
each hostelry to keep matters in order. This official, accompanied by
his scribe, comes to the hostelry every evening; and the scribe writes
down the name of every guest, seals up the list, and locks the door.
They come again in the morning and go over the list and the inmates;
and a man goes with the travellers to the next hostelry and returns to
the officer with proof that they have arrived.... The traveller can buy
all he needs at these inns.”

Batûta visited the great port of Zaitun (Touen-chow), whence, among
other manufactures, “clothes of gold and _satyns_ riche of hewe”[10]
were shipped. Perhaps there was no port in the world with so big a
trade as Zaitun. Batûta thought so: “The harbour is one of the greatest
on the earth—I err—it is the greatest. There I have seen an hundred
junks of the biggest size at one time, and more smaller ones than could
be numbered.... Here, as in every Chinese city, every citizen has a
garden and a field, and his house stands in the middle of the land he
owns. For this reason, the cities of China are very much spread out.”
At Zaitun, he had the good fortune to meet, in the Moslem quarter, the
ambassador who had been sent to Delhi; and now great folk began to make
his acquaintance. Among his visitors was “one of the merchants to whom
I owed money when I ran into debt on my arrival in India, and who had
shown more breeding than the rest of my creditors.” The Head Mandarin
wrote to the Emperor to ask permission for the traveller to visit him
at his capital; and, while awaiting a reply, allowed him to travel by
water-way far inland from Canton, and provided him with an escort. At
Canton, he found temple-hospitals for widows and orphans, the blind,
crippled, and infirm.

He tells how the sailors stood up amidship to row, and the passengers
sat fore and aft. He visited one of those wonderful saints who claimed
incredible years. The holy man told him that he was one of the saints
whom he had visited in India. This man had the reputation of being able
to induce visions. Possibly he united the qualifications of skilled
hypnotist and skilled liar.

When our traveller returned to Canton he received permission to visit
the capital. He journeyed many days by land and along the Imperial
Canal. He speaks rapturously of the fertility and charm of the country
he passed through. Everywhere he was treated with the deepest respect.
But there was a drawback: everywhere Paganism was flourishing. He met
a fellow-believer, the brother of one of the seers of Egypt, a man
greatly esteemed by the Chinese, and later on one particular prophesy
was completely fulfilled, for he came across another brother, whom it
was also foretold he should meet, on the borders of Sahara.

While attending the court of the viceroy at Hang-chow, he was
eye-witness to a remarkable feat, of which he gives as circumstantial
an account as one would expect to get from a man of the fourteenth
century. “It was in the hot season, and we were in the courtyard
outside the palace. A juggler, a slave of the Khân, came in, and the
Emir commanded him to show some of his marvels. Thereupon the juggler
took a wooden bowl with several holes made in it, and through these
holes long thongs were passed. He laid hold of these thongs, and threw
the bowl up into the air. It went so high that we could no longer
see it. There was only a little of the end of the thong left in the
juggler’s hand. He ordered one of his boy helpers to lay hold of it and
mount. The boy climbed up the thong, and he also went out of sight.
The juggler called him three times; but no reply came; so he seemed
to get into a great rage, snatched up a knife, and laid hold of the
thong; and he also was no longer to be seen. After a time, down came
one of the boy’s hands, then a foot, than the other hand, then the
other foot, then the trunk, and, lastly, the head. And now, down came
the juggler, panting, and his clothes in a bloody state. He kissed the
ground in front of the Emir and said something to him in Chinese. The
Emir gave him some order, and he then took up the severed parts, laid
them together properly, gave a kick, and behold! the boy got up and was
before us again. I was so astounded that my heart beat violently, as it
did when the Sultan of India had a similar trick done before me. A drug
was given me, which set me right again. The Khazi Alfkaouddîn was next
to me. ‘By Allah!’ said he, ‘as for me I believe there has been neither
going up nor coming down, nor cutting to pieces, nor making the boy
whole again. It is nothing but trickery.’”

We must not forget that Batûta was more than inclined to superstition,
that he was very perturbed by what he saw, or thought he saw, that the
“magician” had boys with him, who probably assisted in this trick,
and that it is part of the conjurer’s art to divert the attention of
spectators while in the actual performance of his feats. And the event
was reduced to writing years after it was observed. Moreover, one of
the earlier investigations of the Society for Psychical Research shewed
that, on an occasion when a clever amateur conjurer, not known to be
such, invited highly educated and observant witnesses to a supposed
spiritualistic séance, and received their accounts of what they
believed themselves to have seen, written independently of each other
and immediately after the event, “not one of the detailed reports is
accurate throughout, and scarcely one of them is accurate in even all
the points of importance.”[11] But we have it on the authority of the
Professor of Chinese at Cambridge that P’u Sung-ling, the author of the
Liao Chai, relates having seen the complete trick, as Batûta describes
it, in the seventeenth century,[12] except that, in this case, the
boy came out of a box. These are, perhaps, the most remarkable of many
similar mystifications, some of them related by quite respectable
witnesses, from the 13th century down to our own time.[13]

He tells us of the excellent workmanship of Chinese artisans, and
how they worked in chains for a period of ten years. At the end of
that time, they were free to go about in China, but not to leave the
frontiers. At 50, they became absolutely free men, and were maintained
at the public cost, old age pensioners, in fact, in this early
fourteenth century. And the pension was not merely given to these
slave-workers, but to nearly all Chinese.

He admired the gay life on the canal, crowded with the boat-houses
of the people—a teeming happy population, dressed in bright colours,
and pelting one another in pure fun with oranges and lemons. Hang-chow
had within its great encircling wall six towns, each guarded by walls.
At Khaniku or Khanbalik (Pekin?) he was present at the obsequies of a
great dignitary, whom he believed to be the Tartar Emperor; but that
was not so, for the Emperor, who had ascended the throne 14 years
before Batûta’s arrival, reigned 21 years after his departure. But
he certainly was present at the funeral of some great Tartar; for
his account of the interment of the Tartar dignitaries of China is
confirmed by at least one other early traveller. He tells us of how the
dead man’s concubines and horses were buried with him, alive, in the
same grave. He relates, not very correctly, the ceremonies observed at
the court of the Emperor. Apparently his recollection becomes confused
with that of the court-usage at Delhi and Yemen. In any case, it is
possible that he only had an interview with some viceroy, concerning
whom he was misinformed or somehow mistook him for the supreme Khân.

A revolt against Tartar rule took place about this time, so Batûta
thought it prudent to leave China. He embarked on a junk which belonged
to the King of Sumatra, whom he had visited on his way out, and “whose
servants are Mohammedans.” On the voyage the junk laboured through
a terrific storm. The mirage of a big mountain was also seen. The
sailors took this for the fabled roc, with which the _Arabian Nights
Entertainment_ made our Childhood acquainted.

He remained in Sumatra three months, the guest of the monarch who had
before entertained him; and was fortunate in witnessing the nuptials
of the heir-apparent. First came dancers and merry minstrelsy; then
the bride, conducted from the apartments of the women by forty richly
adorned ladies, who carried her train. For this high occasion, they
had removed their veils. The bride went up on a platform; and the
bridegroom rode up, in all the pride of armour, of a stately elephant,
and of his own self-importance. One hundred youths of quality,
beardless like himself, attended him on horseback. They were clad in
white, their caps being a glitter of gold and jewels. Largess was
scattered among the crowd. The prince now went up to his father, kissed
his foot, and ascended the platform. Then the bride rose and kissed her
groom’s hand; he sat beside her, and he and she put betel and fawfel
into one another’s mouth. Then the covering of the platform was let
down, and the whole structure, with bride and bridegroom on it, was
carried into the palace. Finally, a feast was given to the crowd.

From Sumatra, Batûta voyaged in a junk to the Malabar coast of
Southern India, and thence sailed to Arabian Zafar (A.D. 1347), both
well-remembered places, coasted to Hormuz, wandered over the Two Iraks
(Persia and Mesopotamia) once again; made across Asia Minor to Tadmor
and as far north as Aleppo. At Damascus he got the first news of home
he had received during his wanderings; his father had lain fourteen
years in his quiet grave at Tangier. The Black Death was raging at
Damascus. It slew twenty-four hundred of the inhabitants in a single
day. So Batûta made his way to Egypt through Syria and Palestine, and
went on to Mecca by way of the Red Sea and Jidda. This was the fourth
of his pilgrimages. On his return to Cairo, he found the Black Death
wasting the population. Mocking, lethal, invisible, this awful plague
was rapidly sweeping westward and destroying whole families. Agnolo
da Tura of Siena tells us that he had to bury five of his sons in the
same grave with his own hands, and that his was no exceptional case.
Batûta left Cairo for Jerusalem and returned from Palestine to Egypt by
sea. He now felt a desire to see his native land again. He took ship to
Sardinia, and, wishing to see the island, let the vessel he had voyaged
in go to Tunis. He was lucky, for it was taken by Christians. He
managed to reach Tunis in another ship, and got to Fez overland on Nov.
8th, 1349; having been on his travels nearly a quarter of a century. He
presented himself before the Sultan, and was received as was befitting
so pious a pilgrim and distinguished a traveller.




CHAPTER IX

MOORS OF SPAIN AND NEGROES OF TIMBUKTU


But Batûta’s travels were by no means at an end. He made a filial
visit to the place where earth that “makes all sweet” had closed on
his father’s history. Once at Tangier, the temptation was strong to
cross the Straits and visit the shrinking Moslem dominion in Spain. He
landed where his compatriots had landed to conquer the Peninsula—at
Gibraltar (Jabal Tarik, the Hill of Victory). He saw a cousin by his
mother’s side, who had settled here; ran all over Moorish Andalusia,
visiting renowned cities that still remained in Mohammedan hands; and
came to lordly Grenada, where the Alhambra must have been nearing its
completion. He returned to Fez by way of Ceuta.

His energy was unabated; his thirst for travel unquenched; he could not
settle down. In February, 1352, he is off again; this time for Central
Africa. At Tafilelt, on the borders of Sahara, he meets another brother
of the Sheik at Alexandria; and so another prophecy is fulfilled. In
mid-Sahara, he finds an oasis with a “village on it where there is
nothing good. The mosque and the houses are built of blocks of salt and
are covered with camel hide. There is no tree, for the soil is pure
sand; but there are mines of salt.” He had dropped on those dwellings
of rock-salt of which Herodotus wrote seventeen hundred years before
him. But only the underlings of traders abode there; and dates and
camel’s flesh were their fare. Here was the salt-supply for the wild
tribes of Sahara. They cut the blocks of it into a certain shape and
used this as money. The caravan with which Batûta travelled suffered
severely here from the vileness of the water.

When Tashala was reached, the caravan rested three days to make ready
for a vast and solitary tract of desert “where there is no water, nor
is bird or tree to be seen, only sand and hills of sand, blown about by
the wind in such wise that not the smallest vestige of a track remains.
Wherefore, no one can travel without guides from among the traders;
but of these there are many. The sunlight there is blinding.... Evil
spirits have their will of that man who shall travel by himself. They
enchant him, so that he wanders wide of his path, and there he comes to
his end.”